COUN 5773 — Theology and Counseling
Week 5 Reading: Christology, Incarnation, and the Imago Dei (Chapter 4)
Kutter Callaway and William Whitney
March 3, 2026


4
Christology, Incarnation, and the
Imago Dei
Key takeaways from this chapter:
The fullest manifestation of God’s incarnational project is the person and work of Jesus.
Jesus’s incarnation is the means by which God is redeeming all aspects of human life, including our bodies and emotions.
Christ’s entering into the suffering and pain of others gives us a glimpse of what an incarnational psychology might look like.
Being human is not a destination but a journey in which we become more like Christ, the imago Dei.
I (William) had the good fortune one day to be driving in my car while Krista Tippett’s wonderful radio program,
On Being, was being broadcast on NPR. On this day, Krista had just started interviewing the well-known Quaker author and educator Parker Palmer. Palmer was describing his experience with depression and how difficult it was during that time for people to sit and be with him in his depressive state. Here is his recollection:
These were the people who would say, “Gosh, Parker, why are you sitting in here being depressed? It’s a beautiful day outside. Go feel the sunshine and smell the flowers.” And that, of course, leaves a depressed person even more depressed, because while you know, intellectually, that it’s sunny out and that the flowers are lovely and fragrant, you can’t really feel any of that in your body, which is dead in a sensory way. And so

you’re left more depressed by this “good advice” to get out and enjoy the day. And then other people would come and say something along the lines of “Gosh, Parker, why are you depressed? You’re such a good person. . . . You’re so successful, and you’ve written so well.” And that would leave me feeling more depressed because I would feel, “I’ve just defrauded another person who, if they really knew what a schmuck I was, would cast me into the darkness where I already am.”1
Those of you who have struggled with depression might know exactly what Palmer is describing. Having gone through my own battle with depression in my twenties, I (William) can relate to the hopelessness and deadness of the feeling Palmer described, and I can also attest to how frustrating it was being offered quick-fix solutions from well-intentioned people. Frankly, church leaders can sometimes lead the pack in advice-giving, providing spiritual solutions wrapped up in tidy little packages like “pray more” or “cast your cares upon God.” It’s not that this advice has no kernel of truth in it, but it’s especially misguided when it is offered from a place where the person giving the advice is doing so because they are uncomfortable sitting with the person who is suffering. But even if depression isn’t something that you’ve experienced firsthand, you probably can still relate to a time when you’ve been in pain or have been suffering. Instead of a friend or family member seeking to try to understand your experience, listen to you, or be present with you, they tried to “fix” the problem as they understood it, or gave you advice on what you needed to do. As the program continued, Palmer went on:
There was this one friend who . . . after asking permission to do so, every afternoon about 4 o’clock, sat me down in a chair in the living room, took off my shoes and socks, and massaged my feet. He hardly ever said anything; he was a Quaker elder. And yet, out of his intuitive sense, from time to time would say a very brief word like, “I can feel your struggle today,” or, farther down the road, “I feel that you’re a little stronger at this moment, and I’m glad for that.” But beyond that, he would hardly say anything. He would give no advice. He would simply report, from time to time, what he was intuiting about my condition. Somehow he found the one place in my body, namely the soles of my feet, where I could

experience some sort of connection to another human being. And the act of massaging just—in a way that I really don’t have words for—kept me connected with the human race.2
Palmer’s story provides a beautiful picture of what it means to have someone sit and be present with suffering, staying connected with another human being. What Palmer did not need were people trying to offer advice. What was most helpful was having a person making a connection with him in a very tactile and bodily way. Parker’s friend offered help and comfort that was “incarnated” in a particular way through bodily presence and empathy. As Palmer relates, this friend was also willing to hold the “sacred space of relationship” for him.3
What Palmer describes as a sacred space connects to some of the main themes that we will discuss in this chapter: incarnation, embodiment, and restoration. As we look at the ministry and mystery of the incarnation—that is, God becoming flesh in Jesus
Christ—we find the origin of what it truly means to enter the world of another.
Christ entered into the suffering of the human world, giving precedent for what it means to enter into the suffering of others.
Thus, the main purpose of this chapter is to consider what it means for us to practice psychology in light of the Christian belief that God has been revealed in Jesus Christ. A closely related concern has to do with how our psychological research and clinical practice might be different (and perhaps should be different) given that we believe that humans are created in the image of the God who took on flesh.
This theological framework paints a picture of what an
“incarnational” psychology might look like. While this topic could be a book all on its own, for now we want to orient you to a number of key areas regarding the ongoing work of Christ, expound on what it means for human beings to be created in the image of God, and then discuss a few of the ways these theological concepts overlap with topics in psychology.
In the previous chapter, we talked about how the presence of
God’s Spirit is vital for recognizing and affirming the ways humans can partner with God’s activity in the broader world, and how this

includes realms that are not explicitly Christian, or even theistic.
We’ve also turned to the doctrine of creation as a foundational theological doctrine for conceptualizing the relationship between psychology and the Christian faith, providing the “stage” where
God’s action in the world takes place through the Son and Spirit.
Along similar lines, Irenaeus used the metaphor of God’s “two hands” in the world as the working of the Son and Spirit.4 And it is a trinitarian framework of precisely this kind that provides a starting point for how we talk about the significance of the Son’s and the
Spirit’s work in the church and the broader world. To speak of God as Trinity—God as Father, Son, and Spirit—is to make a statement about the relational nature of God. Or, said another way, God exists in relationship and invites the world and the human creature into the joy and abundance of God’s own life through Jesus Christ.
Ultimately, God’s action of creating, sustaining, redeeming, and perfecting the world and humanity through the Son and Spirit is the gospel story, a story of love. As such, it is also the lens through which we understand the world around us, ourselves, and, as it relates to our present purposes, even psychology.
God creates and brings the human creature into existence out of love. God sustains the human creature through the Spirit (despite humanity’s refusal to sometimes participate in the action of God).
God redeems the human creature through Christ. And God perfects the human creature over time by bringing the Creator’s original intentions to fulfillment through the Spirit of Christ. As we discussed in chapters 2 and 3, it is possible to understand human involvement in clinical and research psychology as God’s Spirit actively calling and enabling human creatures to participate as co-laborers in God’s creative work to bring about wholeness and healing. In this chapter, we direct our attention more closely to the ways that God’s revelation, incarnation, and redemption through Jesus Christ make a difference for understanding aspects of human flourishing, the affirmation of our emotional and bodily states, and the possibility of liberation from oppression.

God’s Revelation in Jesus Christ
The bulk of the previous chapter was about how people of Christian faith would benefit from thinking of general revelation in terms of
God’s wider presence, which includes the work of the Spirit within creation, conscience, and human culture (and this includes realms of psychology). Here we will focus more on what theologians have historically spoken of as special revelation, which is God’s revelation and salvation through Jesus Christ. In some ways the terms “general revelation” and “special revelation” are helpful, especially when delineating the uniqueness of Christ’s life, death, and resurrection.
While general revelation provides glimpses of God’s goodness, beauty, and truth to the world, it does not detail or give specifics of salvation through Jesus Christ. However, in other ways the terms
“general” and “special” revelation are unhelpful, especially when we forget that general and special revelation work together as complementary modes of God’s loving extension into the world through the Spirit and Son. God’s revelatory presence sustains and protects creation, allowing humans to discover truths through the sciences and psychology that are reliable and trustworthy (general revelation). At the same time, God’s self-disclosure also restores and redeems humanity (special revelation). Having described some of the ways God’s wider presence manifests through general revelation, here we hope to demonstrate some of the contours of special revelation that directly affect our work in the psychological sciences.
The central message of the Christian faith is that God reveals
God’s own self through Jesus. This confession is so comprehensive
(even cosmic) in its scope that it impacts every topic we explore and every discipline in which we participate, including psychology. The
Christian church through the centuries has reflected on this confession of Christ within the varied contexts and cultures that the church has found itself. In certain important respects, just as we indicated in chapter 3, the Christian confession that Christ is Lord moves us beyond the walls of the church, inviting us to imagine how
Christ’s work makes a difference for the societies, cultures, and neighborhoods in which we live and work. We also suggested in

chapter 1 that psychology is its own culture (albeit a scientific one) with a set of practices, languages, institutions, and traditions that constitute it as such. The task then for Christians who work within psychology is to begin to contextualize how the person and work of
Christ makes a difference for the various fields of psychology they find themselves in.
When we think about the difference that Christ makes for the field of psychology, we are engaging in the same task that Christians have engaged throughout history as they considered how God might be made “incarnate” within their own contexts and cultures, each of which was as wide-ranging as it was particular. Moreover, when we think about Christ becoming flesh in order to redeem and restore, this has numerous implications for how we understand the flourishing or thriving of the human creature. Confession of Christ involves a proper (re)ordering of our lives and actions, and the centrality of Christ’s life and work impacts the vocation that we have been called to, no matter what that work looks like or what that discipline might be. Whether it involves helping to guide and transform the relationships and behavioral patterns of a child, adolescent, or family as a psychotherapist, or conducting ethical psychological research in any subdiscipline as a psychological scientist, our confession of Christ impacts and shapes our day-to-day work, our ethical vision, and our sense of vocation as psychological practitioners.
Incarnation, Abundant Life, and Shalom
Christians who study psychology can understand Christ’s work of salvation as an affirmation that Christ came to restore and redeem all aspects of human existence—that is, the bodily, the spiritual, and the emotional. Jesus experienced the full range of human emotions, living a life of joyful intimacy and communion with God and others.
This does not mean that Jesus did not suffer, experience sadness, or have anguish, as he most certainly did (see Matt. 26:38; Luke
22:44). In fact, Jesus encountered moments of profound grief (John
11:35) and even anger (Mark 3:1–6; John 2:15–17). What we learn

from Jesus is that to experience life as a human is to be present and feel and experience the joy and struggles of the world in which we live. To be human also means that we live in a world where God’s kingdom has partially come but is not fully actualized. Sadness, anger, and suffering are realities that we could not completely eliminate. Like Jesus, Christians still hurt (and unfortunately, hurt others too). Those who follow Christ still encounter suffering, and they still have to work through family and relational conflict. As
Parker Palmer states, “To move close to God is to move close to everything that human beings have ever experienced . . . and that, of course, includes a lot of suffering, as well as a lot of joy.”5 This reality alone can ground and center us as we also encounter suffering or stand alongside those who suffer (2 Cor. 1:4–5; Heb.
2:18).
The message of the gospel is that, in Christ, God’s kingdom has broken into the world in a new way, but one that still waits eagerly for complete restoration. God is not a dispassionate observer of our suffering, though. We can affirm as Christians that we have a God who suffered in Christ. Furthermore, God does not abandon us in our suffering. According to the New Testament, rather than offering a purely “spiritual” solution for the concrete problems that plague humanity, the abundant life that Christ offers includes bodily restoration, proclamation of freedom for those imprisoned, recovery of sight for the blind, and freedom for those who are oppressed
(Luke 4:18). These movements of redemption and healing caused theologians Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendell and Jürgen Moltmann to sum them up as the “great love story of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, a divine love story in which we are all involved together with heaven and earth.”6 Though sin distorts how humanity relates to God and hinders human flourishing and disrupts the created order, it does not corrupt creation entirely or alter God’s commitment to the human community through the Son and Spirit.7 God’s covenant love continues to graciously sustain humanity and to

“overrule the worst that the human race can do to subvert [God’s] order.”8
Wholeness, restoration, new life, abundant life, harmony, peace, shalom: these are all words that attempt to capture elements of the human flourishing that Christ actualizes through his incarnation, life, death, and resurrection. The Hebrew word “shalom,” however, offers a particularly rich and meaningful description of the abundant life that Jesus brings. It is often translated as “peace,” but a fuller examination of the word describes more than just an absence of conflict; it also connotes wholeness and abundance of life. Cornelius
Plantinga describes shalom as the “webbing together of God, humans, and all creation in justice, fulfillment, and delight.”9 Shalom is the way God intends things to be, where God’s justice and peace reign supreme, where relationships are ordered toward love instead of toward greed, hate, or violence. Shalom is a glimpse of a new reality where the wolf and the lamb will dwell together and all creation will not hurt or destroy one another (Isa. 11:6–10). Shalom gives us a vision of a reality where humans properly understand their place in the cosmos—not existing to dominate or destroy creation or others but to tend and care for the things God has placed under human supervision.
Frankly, who doesn’t want a world where more peace, mercy, and love reign supreme? Who doesn’t long for the day when justice rolls down like a river, and righteousness like a mighty stream (Amos
5:24)? The vision of wholeness and flourishing captured by shalom is one that almost everyone can agree would be good and shares a longing in their hearts for. As students of psychology, we imagine there is a longing for something like shalom in your own heart as you pursue psychological training in order to help others find peace through mental health. Following this core desire is an important part of incarnating the love of Christ and working toward shalom in your own corner of the world, through your work, calling, life, and vocation.
Jesus brought a foretaste of this shalom to humanity through his life, death, and resurrection. The prospering and flourishing of

human life is what Jesus’s ministry of reconciliation is about, and longing for God’s kingdom here on earth means becoming Christ incarnate to those we serve as we cultivate shalom in the arenas that God has given us. God’s work through the Spirit and Son is the movement to restore and redeem a creation that has been disrupted by sin. Shalom is the wholeness that God intended for human and nonhuman creation. Balanced with an understanding of the doctrine of creation and pneumatology (explored in chaps. 2 and 3), the concept of shalom makes clear that students of psychology who are people of Christian faith have a role in tending, caring for, and being good stewards of the small part of the created realm they inhabit.10
Incarnation and Embodiment as an Affirmation of
Bodily Existence
All Christian theology hinges on the fact that God became flesh in
Jesus Christ to bring restoration to the world. Because God’s project in the world is incarnational (i.e., enfleshed), it brings about a holistic form of restoration that includes all aspects of human existence (the bodily, mental, and emotional realms of human personhood). Although not every dimension of human existence will be restored in the present life, it can begin in the here and now and will be brought to completion in the age to come (the eschaton). For example, the cognitive and emotional development of human persons and their learned patterns of behavior, which are distinctly psychological phenomena, are the very realms that are impacted by the abundant life that Jesus describes in John 10:10. These psychological processes may not be fully restored in the present age, but they can be integrated into our lives in ways that promote rather than preclude the cultivation of shalom, or wholeness.
To move in the direction of this kind of wholeness, however, we must first and foremost acknowledge that human life is both physical and embodied. Warren Brown and Brad Strawn helpfully remind us that, as humans, we do not merely have bodies but we are embodied creatures, and there is no reality that we encounter that

can be perceived apart from our own physicality.11 Because God has created a world where human life is both physical and embodied,
God’s redemptive work in the world also involves God becoming incarnated in bodily form in Jesus Christ.12 God’s saving, restoration, and healing are embodied in Jesus Christ. This fact alone highlights the value of us being created as material and bodily beings. Jesus’s incarnation offers an important affirmation of both human and nonhuman creation. Indeed, according to Irenaeus, the incarnation alone is the basis for God’s affirmation of the goodness of the material world and bodily existence. Irenaeus reasoned that if God the Son takes the form of human flesh, then nothing that is created can be downgraded as unimportant or be treated as fundamentally evil.13
Jesus’s human bodily existence, his experience of the full range of emotional states, and his encounters with suffering demonstrate the value of the human experience, which includes both our bodily existence and our various emotional and psychological states. Thus, the doctrine of the incarnation provides the theological basis for much of the work that we do in the field of psychology, especially as it relates to the affirmation of human life, emotions, and relationships, but also as it concerns the validation of the suffering and pain that we as humans encounter. Of course, as we discussed before, certain aspects of our bodily existence and our psychosocial life are also affirmed through the doctrine of creation. In addition to
God’s incarnation in Jesus, the very fact that God freely created the world out of love is itself the ultimate affirmation of creation’s goodness. God is the one who loves in freedom, freely creates the world out of love, and freely creates because love seeks to share its goodness.14
As a consequence, God’s disclosure of God’s own self through the
Son and Spirit serves as the larger theological framework not only for understanding our own embodied lives but also for how our lives are transformed through the person and work of Christ. God’s creative project in the world has an ultimate end or aim (telos),

which is to sustain, redeem, and bring wholeness to humanity (and the entire creation). Jesus comes to restore human life and existence, and he provides the perfect example of how a human creature’s relationships, emotions, and mind have the potential for being shaped toward the telos that God has intended. And one particular way in which Christ reshapes the telos of human existence is by demonstrating what it looks like to live under the guidance and direction of the Spirit on a moment-by-moment basis (Gal. 5:25).
God’s incarnation in Jesus Christ is therefore a testament both to
God’s compassionate love for a world that is “very good” (Gen. 1:31) and to God’s desire for the human creature to be directed toward ends that are equally good. That being said, to affirm that the nonhuman world (animals, plants, soil, oceans) and the human creature are good is not to deny the reality of evil. We must always acknowledge that the reality of evil remains a threat that impinges on God’s good creation, but we can affirm that God calls creation good in the beginning and that Jesus becoming flesh through the incarnation further affirms that humans, in their emotions, physicality, and biology, are not inherently bad or evil. This is good news for us who study psychology, since so much psychological research is concerned with the very basic emotional, bodily, and behavioral aspects of human existence.
Motivated by this theological vision, it follows that at least some aspects of human healing and wholeness can be aided and guided by the discipline of psychology. This does not mean that psychology, the sciences writ large, or some theory of psychotherapy could ever replace the salvation and restoration offered in Christ. However, the argument we want to put forward is that affirming the centrality of our emotional and bodily life is more critical than ever given the
Christian tradition’s historical tendency to elevate the spiritual realm while simultaneously devaluing the body and emotions. Within evangelical and fundamentalist streams of Christianity in particular, the decoupling of the human creature from the human body has led to forms of mission that stress the salvation of one’s soul to the neglect of the bodily needs of human existence (e.g., disregarding necessities such as food, shelter, clothing). Here, Protestants can

learn much from their Catholic sisters and brothers, whose lived theology has often held the church’s mission of salvation, human dignity, and social justice together in a much tighter way than some streams of White Protestant Christianity in the twentieth century.15
To say that aspects of wholeness and healing can be aided by psychology is to recognize that restoration is often transmitted or mediated in a relational and bodily form, and that psychotherapists often act as an embodied (and incarnated) form of love for their clients or patients. It is also to recognize that, through the creation of these hospitable spaces, healing can and does occur. Our ability to shape, tend, and nurture the created realm is directly related to the ways in which we cultivate our human relations as well.
Relationships that are tended and nurtured through love over time have the potential to thrive, and those relationships that have been neglected and shaped by hatred, violence, or greed lead to a diminishment rather than an enhancement of human personhood.
Our actions and speech have creative capacities, and while we are finite creatures who do not create life out of nothing ( ex nihilo), we do shape relational realms through our actions and speech, each of which has the potential for producing either the restoration or diminishment of life.
Christ in Varied Contexts: Liberation from
Stigmatization and Discrimination
In the first chapter we talked about how both psychology and theology represent different traditions of inquiry. We also discussed the various lenses that theologians have commonly looked through in order to gain clarity on their lives and the world. Just as we noted that there are different lenses that theologians use, we also noted that, within the Protestant Christian tradition, there are also varied denominational and cultural lenses that give us a rich diversity of views and interpretations of Scripture. We all read Scripture from a situated standpoint—a sociocultural context in which we are embedded. As a result, we interpret the person and work of Christ

through the lenses provided to us by our family, background, culture, and community of faith. As theologian Daniel Migliore notes, traditional Western (and predominantly White) interpretations of the person and work of Christ are no less contextual than those done by
Black theologians or those of women.16 In short, cultural history, tradition, and context also influence the various ways that we understand Christ’s work of salvation and restoration. Examining how Christ has been understood in varied cultural contexts provides essential elements for understanding the person and work of Christ, especially in relation to Christ’s ministry of restoration and reconciliation. This is an important point to highlight because White,
Western, Protestant, evangelical conceptions of Christ have often conceptualized salvation as an entirely “otherworldly” process. In doing so, they overlook the significance of emotional and psychological states, failing to recognize that salvation cannot be separated from the concrete realities that constitute human life in the created order.
Responding in part to these historic oversights, David Kelsey’s
Eccentric Existence argues that we should understand theological anthropology in both proximate and ultimate arenas. “Proximate” arenas of existence and restoration are those that relate to the immediate physical, social, and cultural lives of humans. “Ultimate” arenas of existence and restoration are those that are primarily in relation to God, salvation, and the cosmos.17 According to Kelsey,
Christologies developed by African Americans, Latinx, female, and
Asian American theologians, as well as theologies constructed by persons of color, tend to emphasize these proximate arenas of human existence in ways that are applied and oriented toward justice. To focus on these proximate realms is to consider how various forms of oppression, systemic injustices, and the diminishment of human existence are brought about by racism, poverty, and sexism. Each of these serves as a key element for any contemporary theological reflection, but they become even more pertinent as we consider the relations between psychology and
Christianity. Let us consider a few of the ways in which constructive

theologies that emphasize these proximate arenas might help us understand more fully how we can engage in theologically informed psychology.
Liberation Theologies
A deep and abiding concern for social justice often serves as one of the primary motivations for much of the work that we do in psychology. As both of us (William and Kutter) think back to the time we studied at the Fuller Graduate School of Psychology, we remember many classmates who wanted to become psychologists almost entirely because of their desire to help underserved populations, to seek justice in systems that are oppressive, or to provide mental health services for communities where there are pronounced disparities in the health-care system. The emphasis that
Christianity places on the dignity of every human life as a beloved child of God, whether poor or rich, whether Black, Brown, or White, is a vital feature of the gospel. Liberation theology in particular has drawn attention to the important fact that Christians should be very concerned with the plight of the poor. Given that the poor, underprivileged, and marginalized in contemporary societies not only have access to fewer resources but are also oppressed by systems and structures that often favor the rich and those with privilege and power, liberation theology reminds us that, as Christians, we have an obligation to pursue justice for “the least of these” (Matt. 25:40).
Liberation theology’s notion that the church should have a preferential option for the poor is informed by readings of the gospel that understand Jesus as being part of a marginalized group living primarily among the poor.18 For Latin American theologians, Jesus not only identified with those who were on the margins of society but also confronted sinful systems of oppression that kept people in bondage. Our understanding of a theologically engaged psychology is informed by the basic principles espoused by liberation theologians that move us to understand Christ’s work as being involved in these proximate areas of societal injustices in relation to the poor.

Black Theology, Feminist Theology
While liberation theologies and Latin American theologians draw attention to the plight of the poor and systems of oppression, Black theologians rightly draw attention to the complexities and systemic injustices perpetrated by the racist structures of contemporary society. Feminist and womanist theologians draw our attention to sexist structures of society that overlook women, and especially women of color.
One of the chief architects of contemporary Black theology, James
Cone, puts it like this: “The gospel of Jesus is not a rational concept to be explained in a theory of salvation, but a story about God’s presence in Jesus’ solidarity with the oppressed, which led to his death on the cross. What is redemptive is the fact that God snatches victory out of defeat, life out of death, and hope out of despair. . . . I begin and end my theological reflections in the social context of
Black people’s struggle for justice.”19
Black theology was born out of the experiences of those within
North America who have struggled against the oppression of racism and the brutal legacy of slavery. Cone reminds us that God’s salvation is a liberating event in the lives of all who are struggling for survival and dignity in a world bent on denying their humanity.20
Moreover, Black theologians remind us that the cross has a unique meaning for those who are currently experiencing oppression and suffering. As Howard Thurman explains, “It cannot be denied that too often the weight of the Christian movement has been on the side of the strong and the powerful and against the weak and oppressed—this, despite the gospel.”21 Thus, the basic message that
Jesus stands in solidarity with the poor, with those who experience racism, and with those who experience exploitation by an oppressive system is often missed by those in positions of privilege who have not experienced racism, slavery, or living under an oppressive system. Black theologians remind us that context and race matter for how we read and interpret Scripture. For instance, a middle-class
White male who reads Luke 4 about Jesus bringing freedom for

captives and those who are oppressed might envision those who are physically in the prison system, and he might even have some thoughts of what it would mean to serve those who are incarcerated. However, Black theologians remind us that when a
Black woman or man reads about freedom for the oppressed and the captive in a passage like Luke 4, they might remember the historic system of chattel slavery that imprisoned and oppressed grandparents or great-grandparents, or recall the ongoing inequity in our prison system where persons of color regularly receive longer and more severe sentences for the same crimes compared to their
White counterparts.22 As Danté Stewart notes, “To be black and to be Christian is to remember the brutality of our experience and the brilliance of our resistance.”23
Along with the ideas found in liberation and Black theologies concerning Jesus’s solidarity with the oppressed, feminist theologians similarly note that their theology of the cross is informed by their experience of being excluded or oppressed because of their gender. To be a feminist, according to theologian Anne Carr, is to be
“someone (male or female) who recognizes that women are fully human, acknowledges the imbalance and injustice that for centuries has, in church and society, characterized the situation of women, and is committed to righting that wrong.”24 Feminist theologies
(typically those done by White women), womanist theologies
(feminist theological perspectives by Black women), and mujerista theologies (feminist theological perspectives from Hispanic and
Latinx women) all alert us to how oppressive systems of patriarchy and toxic masculinity (and, yes, these are particularly found within the church) can lead to a devaluing and subjugation of women. As feminist theologians correctly point out, Jesus’s identification with those on the margins provides the basis for paying particular attention to the plight of women, since women have for centuries found themselves on the margins of society and the church. New
Testament feminist scholars emphasize that the movement Jesus initiated was fundamentally egalitarian, or “at least was a

countercultural movement that leveled class, ethnic and gender differences, and one that heralded ‘a new redemptive humanity.’”25
As Christians, when we consider what it means to stand in solidarity with the poor, the oppressed, the marginalized, and those who have felt the ostracizing effects of racism or sexism, we understand that our work in psychology must bend toward social justice as well. When we take seriously the fact that Jesus was poor, lived under an oppressive Roman regime, and preached to and healed those who were on the margins, we have no other choice but to examine our own privileges and to work to increase the welfare and flourishing of others. If Jesus Christ is only thought of as a spiritual being, detached from his incarnate, cultural, and embodied humanity, we risk not only overlooking God’s preferential option for the marginalized and the poor, but also projecting our own cultural values onto Jesus.26
Consequently, when we speak of the “reality of the gospel,” we specifically mean a robust vision of humanity and salvation that properly incorporates movement toward others. Theologian Colin
Gunton puts it this way: “If Jesus is the one true image of God, and is the one in whom the right dominion of the creation is reestablished as he speaks of truth, heals the sick and lifts up the oppressed,” then it follows that those who desire to make Christ
“incarnate” for the world will find themselves doing many of the same things.27 This movement is grounded in our vocation within psychology and includes actively shaping social realities for the kingdom. It is true that redemption is about restoration from individual sin, but this also means that we work for redemption on a societal and communal level—working to redeem culturally and socially ingrained imaginations and values. Christ’s incarnation inaugurated a new kingdom and established him as the model for how to treat people with dignity and live in harmony.
On a systemic level, liberation, Black, and feminist theologies remind us of the disheartening and unsettling fact that the church can house prejudices and engage in oppressive behavior toward those with different ethnic heritages and social statuses, just like our

wider culture can. For instance, we recall the disturbing reality that many White slaveholders during the 1800s also professed to be
Christians. Moreover, when we zoom in on the individual level, disciplines like neuropsychology and cognitive psychology reveal how malleable and plastic our decision-making is—even for Christians.
This research suggests that when one is in extremely stressful situations, executive functions are diminished, decision-making is altered, and underlying habitual responses take over.28 It is a humbling reminder that Christians are influenced by power structures and society’s dominant worldview. As a consequence, we have the potential to act in accordance with learned stereotypes that can oppress others, unless these are actively considered, countered, and changed. To be more specific, events that have shaped our conscience—like officer-involved killings of unarmed Black men and women—are not isolated events, and they remind us of the history of systemic oppression, injustice, and racism that have had, and continue to have, devastating effects on the children of God. Many racist events have been dismissed by White Christians, instead of calling out evil for what it is. One is reminded of Martin Luther King
Jr.’s incisive observation: “We will have to repent in this generation not merely for the hateful words and actions of the bad people but for the appalling silence of the good people.”29
Yet, we do not have to settle for this kind of silence. Christ’s example of standing in solidarity with the oppressed provides us with a vision to follow in working to dismantle our own racist and oppressive thoughts and behaviors. As authors, we believe this cannot be done unless we practice an incarnational psychology and enter into the reality of another—not through seeking to give advice or trying to fix things but by being humble and learning to listen and feel and allowing ourselves to be led by God’s Spirit.
Fortunately, we do not have to look very far to discover the extent to which social realities will be shaped in God’s new world. Besides the Scriptures already referenced, the book of Revelation gives us another vision for what this future reality might look like. Revelation
7 depicts a great multitude from every tribe, nation, and tongue

worshiping the Lamb. The picture is a vivid one, with humanity
(despite ethnic differences and language) uniting as one in worship of the Creator. While this vision does not align with what we see in the wider society, or in many communities of faith, it nevertheless becomes the end to which we are all oriented. God has set the created order on a certain trajectory to be transformed by the Son and Spirit, and Christians and communities of faith have the responsibility to work toward the renewal of the present world to reflect this coming kingdom. We believe that work in psychology can be an extension of the work of the church in cultivating restorative spaces for those who have been stigmatized, marginalized, or oppressed.
The Incarnation of Christ as the Model for What It
Means to Be Human
We’ve already noted how psychology alone cannot provide a comprehensive ontology that tells us everything about human nature. Yet psychology’s methodological naturalism does not mean that Christians who practice psychology must also subscribe to a purely naturalistic portrait of human nature.30 Psychology offers important insights into human personhood, but comprehensive statements regarding ontology (i.e., what it means to be human) are deepened and broadened when we consider the theological reality that God became human in Christ. This kind of theological broadening was evidenced by what we noted above regarding the proximate arenas of human existence that certain Christologies highlight, namely, that Christ’s life and death move us to consider how we live and act toward others and how we work for justice and healing in the world around us—especially in our work within the discipline of psychology.
The reality of Christ taking on flesh is a core aspect of Christian theological anthropology and a Christian ontology of being. Although psychology speaks of the relational and social components of human personhood, the Christian theological tradition would suggest that

psychology can speak of these realities and study these realities only because God has created humans as relational and social creatures.
Furthermore, although psychology provides a helpful means for understanding the various relational and social aspects of humanity, psychological explorations are not always informed by Christian or theological conceptions of personhood. Christians who study psychology can use and greatly benefit from psychology’s insights, and there are considerable areas of overlap, but our view of humanity is not informed only by psychology. For instance, God’s affirmation of humanity in Christ and God’s revelation of God’s own self through Christ both expands on and reorients the insights into humanity that are gleaned in and through psychology. Christ as the
One who lived an abundant and flourishing life becomes the model—
the exemplar—of a life lived fully and abundantly. It is Christ who is the epitome of what it truly means to be human, and it is Christ, as the paradigm of God’s determination of the creature, who “actualizes human personhood rather than stunts the creature’s freedom.”31
We are discussing Christology and theological anthropology (i.e., what it means for humans to be created in the image of God) in the same chapter because we understand Christ to be the perfect embodiment of humanity. Much of the discussion about humanity in the integration literature has tended to focus on the imago Dei apart from a consideration of what it means for humanity to be re-created, renewed, and restored by Christ. In addition, as Dallas Willard has noted, popular church culture’s message about morality and the sinful tendencies of human nature has resulted too often in a
“gospel of sin management” rather than an emphasis on the freedom, wholeness, transformation, and restoration that new life in
Christ brings.32 Even within the psychology and theology literature, there is the tendency to focus almost exclusively on the depraved state of humanity.33 As a result, those studying and teaching psychology are in need of a more holistic view that highlights humanity’s wholeness and restoration—one that conceives of humanity as moving toward a particular telos. Rather than a static notion of humanity, a view of this kind emphasizes the dynamic,

developmental processes by which humans are conformed into the image of Christ.34
In light of the New Testament’s witness of Christ being the image of God (2 Cor. 4:4; Col. 1:15), Christ plays a central role in our understanding of what it means to be human creatures likewise made in the imago Dei (Rom. 8:29; 1 Cor. 15:49). Even though the term itself comes from the passage in Genesis 1:26–27 where the creation story speaks of God creating humanity in God’s image, the imago Dei takes on new meaning as the New Testament authors deploy it in order to understand the theological significance of the person and work of Christ. For example, the apostle Paul suggests in
Colossians 1:15–23 that Christ illuminates true human personhood and transformation. According to Paul, Christ remains the perfect example of the embodied Word, both creature and Creator, who is both fully human and fully divine.35 Oliver Crisp notes that “human beings are made in the image of God by being made in the image of
Christ.”36 Similarly, Karl Barth famously argued that the “ontological determination of humanity is grounded in the fact that one man among all others is the man Jesus.”37 In other words, Christ as the true image of God is the example for humanity because Christ reverses the pattern of fallen humanity, thus bringing about restoration and healing. This reversal of the human story by Christ, through the power of the Spirit, is a description of the re-creating and redirecting of true human destiny through Christ’s life, death, and resurrection.38 Humanity is created with the capacity to image
God through Christ, both individually and collectively. In love, God allows those who might not acknowledge Christ or God to still experience aspects of thriving through God’s common grace.
Christians thrive through their participation in the life of the triune
God and as they become more like Christ—and non-Christians also have the capacity for relationship with God, though they may not exercise this capacity in the same way.39

Christian Anthropology in Dialogue with the
Psychological Sciences
Both psychology and Christian anthropology are interested in the proximate features of human existence. Although ultimate realms of existence (i.e., eschatological hope and resurrected bodies—yes, bodies!) are essential features of Christian anthropology, the proximate realms of human existence are the key points of overlap between psychology and theology. For instance, from a Christian anthropological standpoint, it is the work of both the Son and Spirit within the material and embodied existence of human lives that brings persistent and consistent healing, whether social, emotional, mental, or behavioral. By focusing on these more proximate concerns, we are able to move from abstract theological reflections toward a consideration of more concrete matters such as the relational and social capacities of humanity, the embodied nature of the human creature, and the malleability and dynamism that occur in human development. While we are intentionally not including a lengthy survey of the various viewpoints of the image of God
(because these can be found easily elsewhere), these three components of Christian anthropology are especially important for engaging in theologically informed psychology.
Relational and Social Capacities of Humanity
One of the chief points of connection between Christian conceptions of human personhood and psychology’s understanding of humanity is how both disciplines describe the relational and social dimensions of human nature. In terms of Christian anthropology, the relational dimensions of how God created humanity are quite clear.
Starting with the creation story in Genesis, God creates humanity within a network of relationships, and these relationships include
God, other humans, nonhuman animals, the earth, and our own selves. Knowing that God’s Spirit moves and works in all aspects of this relational matrix, we also understand that when any of these relationships is broken, misguided, or disjointed, we are not living the fullest life that we can live.

Echoing Scripture, psychology also operates with a fundamentally social and relational portrait of human nature—as well as recognition that relationships can make or break us. Children exposed to consistent abuse and trauma learn to be fearful about relationships and the world around them, whereas children who are lovingly nurtured develop a sense of confidence about themselves and can learn to explore the world from the secure base of their caregiver.
Here we find evidence that Scripture’s command to love God and love neighbors is not only instructive about how we should treat one another but also has the effect of strengthening relationships and social bonds over time. Christ came to bring a new order to our relational world, a relational reordering of priorities that properly situates us within the created realm and, in turn, enhances our capacity to flourish as the relational creatures we are.
Embodied Nature of the Human Creature
As theologians have attempted to discern from Scripture what makes human nature unique, a common critique is that their descriptions of the imago Dei often drift into abstractions that easily overlook or simply dismiss the significance of human embodiment.
To avoid this common error, we must foreground and not forget the
“earthy, embodied dimensions of humanness.”40 Theological explorations of human nature that focus only on intelligence or language to describe humanity are far too narrow and dismiss the vast complexities of how body, brain, mind, and spirit are intricately intertwined. The term “embodiment” is the word we use to speak of the whole-person view of humanity that comprises body, brain, mind, and spirit in a psychosomatic unity. We’ve already noted that being created in the image of God means that we are re-created in
Christ’s image and we possess the capacity to relate to God and others, but the emphasis on embodiment here sums up the important fact that Christ had a body and that to be human is to exist in a certain embodied form that shapes our very nature.
Moreover, as humans we cannot relate in any other way with God,

others, and the world around us except through our own embodied selves.
On Being and Becoming Human
“Becoming” is simply the term we are using to describe the dynamic state of change that occurs in the physical, biological, and spiritual realms of human growth and development over time—from conception, infancy, and childhood on up to adulthood. From a theological perspective, authentic human identity is never something that is fully achieved or possessed by the human creature but is something that we more closely approximate as we grow and change over time. Becoming human is therefore a “perpetual movement of receiving and responding” to the gifts and the absolute generosity of the triune God.41 Susan Ross similarly observes that being created in God’s image is “not a static reality found in one discrete and identifiable part of ourselves” but is rather a “dynamic process of opening ourselves to the world, caring for it as best we can with all of our abilities, and reflecting on our place in the world with both awe and lament.”42 In other words, to conceive of humanity in terms of the imago Dei is to understand the human person as a fundamentally dynamic creature—with change and growth happening over time as humans live in reciprocal relationships with God, others, and the created realm.43
Every human person enjoys gifts from God and can flourish when they move toward relating to themselves and with others in ways that reflect the compassionate and self-giving love of Christ. This element of flourishing is what we might consider the common telos of human being and becoming, and it is made possible by the wider work of the Spirit of God in the world; however, flourishing or abundant life for the Christian also has a particularized telos
. This distinctly Christian, developmental vision of thriving freely acknowledges that, through the Spirit, Christ is at work in our lives, which moves us to consider both proximate and ultimate arenas of human existence. Although the image of God in humanity is given

structure through Christ, the “Spirit . . . realizes a particular pattern of life on earth.”44 Thus, the relation between Christ and the Spirit in regard to anthropology looks like this: Christ redeems and organizes a pattern for human existence in the world, while the Spirit particularizes and brings freedom within the structures of the world.45
A Journey rather than a Destination
If the human sciences have taught us anything in the past thirty years, especially through discoveries in neuroscience and neuropsychology, it is how malleable human development is. While genetic makeup does dictate functional structures of one’s personhood, it provides only a rough sketch, and the rest is formed through complex environmental interactions as humans relate with the world around them.46 Humans are shaped and formed as they interact and make meaning of the world, and this includes both physical and spiritual realities. Although developmental psychology speaks to how our cognitive structures and physical abilities are shaped along with the physical world around us—especially as infants—we also note that we are shaped by ongoing human engagement with the being and activity of God. Such a conceptualization affirms the significance of the human person’s relational capacities and embodied nature, but it also recognizes that these physical, embodied capacities do not stand outside the purview of the ongoing activity of Christ’s Spirit.
Given that the Spirit creates new energies as the sustainer and perfecter of life, we should not be surprised that there could be dynamism and change over time when conceptualizing human nature from a Christian theological anthropological perspective. Put differently, the process of being conformed to the image of the incarnate Christ who is the imago Dei reflects an end or telos to which we will never fully arrive in the present age. Additionally, human nature itself is fundamentally dynamic, developmental, and in process. Consequently, we can say with some confidence that to be

human as Christ is human is not about arriving at some destination or disembodied state of being, but about embarking on a fully embodied journey toward the kind of abundant life that was made possible through the incarnation.
Questions for Reflection and Discussion
1. As a human, what does it mean to be a body rather than to have a body?
2. What messages about the body and emotions (implicit or explicit) did you receive from your religious tradition?
3. What might it look like to be Christ incarnate to those we serve through clinical and research psychology?
4. In light of the contributions of Black, feminist, and liberation theologies, what does a preferential option for the poor, oppressed, and marginalized mean for your studies and future work as a psychological practitioner?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
Balswick, Jack O., Pamela Ebstyne King, and Kevin S. Reimer.
The
Reciprocating Self: Human Development in Theological Perspective. 2nd ed. Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2016.
Brown, Warren S., and Brad D. Strawn.
The Physical Nature of Christian Life:
Neuroscience, Psychology, and the Church. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2012.
Gutiérrez, Gustavo.
A Theology of Liberation: History, Politics, and Salvation.
Translated by Caridad Inda and John Eagleson. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis
Books, 1988.
Thurman, Howard.
Jesus and the Disinherited. Boston: Beacon, 1996.
