INTEGRATIVE COUNSELING 	29
specific psychological and theological conclusions that are comparable
with 	each 	other. 	Embodied 	integration 	focuses 	as much 	on the
concreteness 	of psychological and Christian 	living as on Christian
thinking; it connects both psychology and theology with the real world
(91-93). My own focus, as will become clear in the next chapter, is not
so much on the project of integration between psychology and theology
itself as on a foundational anthropology that is developed theologically
as the basis for an approach to counseling from a Christian perspective.
I expect 	that 	those 	who 	do not 	share 	this 	view 	of a Christian
anthropology will not feel that there is much integration.

-- 1 of 91 --

2
Counseling 	the
Whole 	Person
"I am not dying of AIDS; I am living with AIDS," protested
Andrew, who was being interviewed for a news feature on the
effects of the disease. Statistically his distinction was not very
significant. Of twenty acquaintances who were diagnosed with
the disease one year ago, only six were still living.
Why did Andrew cling stubbornly to a perspective of living
with an incurable disease as opposed to dying from it? Is he
permitted 	this illusion 	simply for the 	sake of preserving 	his
personal dignity and emotional stability? Will his attitude affect
the inevitable outcome of the sickness? Will he buy more time
through this "therapeutic" 	redefinition 	of his situation?
He was unable to answer these questions. Nor can anyone
else, for no one has yet explicated the mysterious connection
between 	the 	mental 	and 	the 	physical 	so as to 	predict 	or
manipulate the outcome with any degree of certainty. Will he
succeed in defying the statistics of this fatal disease? Maybe.
Some do, most do not. But this did not seem to be his point. He
had, as we suggested, therapeutically 	redefined 	his situation,
not in defiance of the facts, but in defiance of a logic that made
him merely a victim.
The fact of his disease did not in his view make him a mere
statistic. He saw his life as a structure of reality over which he
retained control by integrating one factor-his 	sickness-into
the whole. He refused to think of himself as a diseased person.
He was a person with a disease, perhaps even a life-threatening
disease. But he retained "script rights" over the story of his life!
30

-- 2 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	31
From a medical perspective, there may well be therapeutic
gains resulting from his positive attitude. Again, there may be
none. But the potential therapeutic gains grew out of the goals
that he set out to define and reach as a living and value-creating
person.
Andrew can use support and counseling as he struggles to
keep his life integrative and whole. Instinctively he maintains
that he is still an intact, whole person. He does not deny that he
has the dread disease, but he chooses to think of himself as a
living person rather than a dying patient. Yet he will also be
tormented by terror, and he will live with the demons of doubt
and despair. It will require 	tremendous resources of psychic
energy and sustained hope to fuel his faith and provide the
power that holds body and soul together. He may face loss of
body functions, feelings of shame and guilt, and rejection from
others who fear to touch or even be with him. He will need to
redefine these experiences therapeutically in order to maintain
this wholistic view of life. If he seeks a counselor, he will need
one as "whole" as he is, one who will tap his resources and
continue his integrative process even as his body deteriorates.
Unlike Andrew, those who have not succeeded in reinterpret-
ing their lives will need more than supportive counseling. They
will require 	extraordinary therapeutic 	insight and skill. How
does one enable another to overcome that sense of shame and
outrage resulting from senseless attacks upon the core of self?
Surely those who counsel need encouragement and empower-
ment in order to lead troubled persons to a wholistic and healthy
view of their lives.
Such understanding and insight is what we hope to provide in
this chapter. Christians who counsel must counsel the whole
person, especially when that person experiences dysfunction in
any aspect of life. In the previous chapter we stressed the point
that 	healing 	is grounded 	in the 	integrative 	powers 	of our
personal humanity, not in the removal of pathology. Andrew has
little chance of recovering from AIDS as a physical disease. But
the integrative powers of his core humanity are responding to an
internal 	drive toward wholeness 	as well as to the love and
support of others. The purpose of this chapter is to look more
closely at components that comprise the 	integrative 	core of
personal humanity. There is a mental and physical aspect to
each person's life, but the integrative core lies between them as

-- 3 of 91 --

32 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
a development of the self in its total ..gestalt," or form of life as
personal, social, and spiritual being.
The development 	of this integrative model will take three
stages. We will look first of all at the dynamics of the self as an
integrative task, showing how the various aspects of the self are
related to each other, to other persons, and to God. Second, we
will look at the ecology of the self, showing how the core of the
self is 	integrated 	in 	three 	spheres, 	or environments, 	each
interfacing 	with the 	other. Third, 	we 	will 	look at the 	life
continuum 	as a context for 	therapy. All this is based 	on a
biblical anthropology as the core paradigm for developing 	a
"Christian psychology." By a Christian psychology I mean a
psychological understanding of personhood that is informed by
the biblical story of humans as created by God, bearing the
divine image, and having a destiny that defines quality of life
here on earth and determines the ultimate meaning and goal of
personal identity .1
The Integrative Self: A Developmental Model
People may be viewed as a set of subsystems, systemically
related. That is, each subsystem with its relative autonomy,
which makes up the person, is part of a whole-which 	is more
than the sum of the parts. For example, the physical body is a
system 	with 	its 	own 	functional 	relationship 	of parts, 	each
contributing to the life of the body. At the 	same time, the
physical 	body 	is 	often 	affected 	by 	the 	mental 	process, 	as
evidenced by the many varieties of psychosomatic symptoms.
The mind and the body are thus "systemically" related, though
each has its own distinctive function.
One way of understanding the biblical teaching that persons
are created in the "image and likeness of God" is to think of
humans as related simultaneously to God and to each other. To
the degree that one system or one aspect of the person operates
"temperamentally," 	or idiosyncratically, there is disorder and
alienation from the total well-being of the system. The effect of
sin is to produce 	this "temperament" 	of individuality, 	self-
aggrandizement, suspicion and fear of the other, and alienation
from the shared life with the other and with God. Thus we hold
that the biblical expression "image of God" applies to the entire
human self, body and soul, including the social and environ-

-- 4 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	33
mental existence of the person. This is why the Bible views sin
as pervading every aspect of human life, not merely the moral or
spiritual dimension.
One could achieve a degree of "health" in terms of functional
competence within each subsystem of the person. For example,
specific therapeutic gains might be achieved by helping a client
overcome severe depression with the result that life can again
become useful and meaningful. Yet other problem areas, such as
sexual 	dysfunction 	or 	troubled 	interpersonal 	relationships,
might still exist. The one subsystem that caused depression has
been healed, but other systems still are not adequately function-
ing. But unless all the subsystems are oriented to the overall
system in a functional and fulfilling way, there 	will be only
partial health from a wholistic perspective. Considered from the
theological standpoint of human beings as systematically related
to God and the other, spiritual wholeness and psychical health
are systemically related. The apostle Paul used systemic lan-
guage in a nontechnical sense when referring to the relation of
the members of the Christian community to the "whole body":
"If 	one member suffers, all suffer together; if one member is
honored, all rejoice together" 	(I Cor. 12:26). In scolding the
Corinthian Christians for celebrating the Lord's Supper to the
exclusion of some, Paul suggests that some have become sick
and some have died because of these actions (I Cor. 11:30). Our
purpose 	here is to show in a schematic way why this is so.
GOD 	GOD
Physical
1 	So ialt>----------<t---1 	So ial>
Per onal 	· 	Per 	nal
Se ual 	Mental 	I 	Se ual 	Physical
Psy 	ical 	I Psyc ical
t Spi ·tuaI 	, Spi tual
SELF 	SELF
Figure I
A schematic diagram of a systems approach to the integration
of the self in this threefold 	way would look like figure 1.
Consider 	the 	diagram 	from 	a 	developmental 	standpoint.
Reading from top to bottom, we see that the progression is from

-- 5 of 91 --

34 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
social to personal to sexual to psychical and finally to spiritual.
As spiritual beings we then have an orientation to God as Spirit
that 	runs 	right 	back 	through 	each 	of the 	other 	subsets 	or
subsystems 	of the self.
We enter into life as infants held in a social relation to our
parents. We are not yet differentiated 	as "persons" 	with a self
identity 	that 	exists 	over 	and 	against 	other 	selves. 	This 	self
identity is formed as "I" begin to distinguish myself from "you"
or even "it." Further development 	entails sexual differentiation,
with 	gender 	identity 	assimilated 	into the 	core 	self identity,
again with respect to the sexual and personal identity 	of other
persons. The development 	of psychical experience 	and capacity
comes later, with a deeper capacity to feel and express emotions.
Infants surely do have a psychical capacity, but their full range
of experience 	and expression are quite limited. Small children
cry 	easily 	when 	hurt 	or frustrated, 	but 	have 	not 	sufficient
psychical 	depth 	to cry at weddings!
Each 	person 	represents 	a duality 	of the 	physical 	and 	the
nonphysical 	(mental). Each person 	is also created 	in a social
construct as the original and primary form of humanity. This is
one way of understanding 	the statement in Genesis 2:18: "It 	is
not good that 	the 	man 	should 	be 	alone." 	The 	fundamental
ecology of persons 	is constituted 	by fellow humanity, 	or co-
humanity.2
The purpose 	of this diagram is not to suggest that these are
stages meant to conform strictly to the theories of developmental
psychology. 	Rather, 	I am suggesting 	a general 	conformity 	to
developmental 	theories of the self for the sake of showing that
what we understand by the "image of God" theologically can be
construed in a way congruent with these developmental 	tasks of
becoming a mature person. The image of God is "given., in the
sense that each person is born with an actual orientation toward
personhood 	that provides the potential of becoming a person in
the fullest sense. Thus we do not mean to suggest that one only
has a human spirit when that stage of development 	is achieved,
but that the human spirit given by God orients us toward him
and integrates 	every other aspect 	of our personal 	being. 	The
human spirit and the image of God need to be developed 	in the
growth of the person the same as other aspects of personality.
The function of the human spirit at an early age is restricted 	in
its expression, 	though 	fully present. 	As the 	self grows, the

-- 6 of 91 --

COUNSELINGTHE WHOLEPERSON 	35
human spirit also grows in its expressive capacity. This in no
way suggests that one is less a "spiritual" being at infancy. In
the same way, the image of God is present in the life of the
person from the beginning, though the expression of that image
will grow developmentally 	as the person matures.
It is quite apparent in this model that the spiritual dimension
is not placed as an initial or even "higher" aspect of the self.
Rather, it is shown both as the goal of personal development and
as the source of the person's orientation to God and the other. If
the spiritual dimension of selfhood were portrayed as the first or
highest in the model, this could lead to the assumption that one
could develop a spiritual life and orientation toward God with
no real integration of the other aspects of the self, or even with a
neglect of these aspects.
Some approaches to counseling from a Christian perspective
seem to assume an anthropology that places the spiritual life as
the higher or initial life of the self. This is combined with a
tendency to bracket the spiritual with the mental, or rational,
self. By appealing to a spiritual motivation that is essentially
mental, or cognitive, counselors may seek to direct the client
toward a "biblical" 	way of thinking as the source of solving
personal problems. The assumption is that if one is spiritually
oriented 	toward God's principles 	and 	lives "obediently" 	in
accordance with these principles, all else will follow. For some
this seems to work. But for those unable to accept this principle
of spiritual 	obedience 	as the 	solution to all problems, 	the
counseling may not be effective.
For example, in the case of Jay Adams, a Christian counselor
who uses the 	Bible as a textbook for counseling, 	a person
seeking counseling must agree to accept biblical authority as a
spiritual guide before entering 	into the counseling 	sessions.
From this same anthropological premise, Adams rejects psycho-
therapy 	out of hand 	as failing to recognize 	the 	essentially
spiritual nature of all personal problems.3 As a result, he offers
no options for Christians to counsel non-Christians except that
conversion to biblical authority and the lordship of Christ be a
condition of entrance into therapy. Nevertheless, it should also
be said that the effectiveness of the Jay Adams model with those
who do receive help based on the principle of biblical authority
and who achieve an integrated personal and social life points to
the intrinsic therapeutic role of spiritual life open to the Word

-- 7 of 91 --

36 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
and Spirit of God. It is for the purpose of providing counseling
from a Christian perspective for these, both Christian and non-
Christian, who have not achieved this therapeutic integration
that we propose this alternative.
In our model we propose an alternative for Christians who
counsel to approach persons in an integrative way, as human
persons first of all, based on a biblical anthropology rather than a
cognitive belief system. The Bible consistently views persons as
social as well as spiritual beings. The effects of sin, as pointed
out above, are found in the social as well as in the moral and
spiritual life of persons. Likewise, the effects of redemption as
therapeutic intervention and healing are measured in terms of
restoration of relationships and of reconciliation with God. This
does not rule out, as we will show in later chapters, such
spiritual resources as faith, prayer, the Holy Spirit, and the use
of the Bible. Nor does it mean that conversion to Jesus Christ
cannot be part of the therapeutic outcome for clients who are
counseled by Christians.
In figure I, the spiritual dimension of the self serves as the
integrating motive and drive for all the other components of the
sel£ If there should be disorder or dysfunction at any of the
other dimensions-say 	the sexual-this 	will be a hindrance to
the integration of the self as a function of the life of the spirit.
The difference between this model and Jay Adams's is that in
this case the spiritual dimension is not located primarily in the
cognitive or mental faculty of the self. Rather, the spiritual
dimension is a movement of the whole self as an integrated
person. Instead of spirituality in the form of "biblical thinking,"
this model suggests spirituality as more of a "biblical practice"
of life. Biblical practice as a model of wholeness and holiness is
typically described 	in terms of integrative life, both in the
relation of the mental and the psychical life and in the sexual,
personal, and social dimension. For example, in his letter to the
Galatians Paul describes the "works of the flesh" in terms of
interpersonal conflicts and disorders along with inner drives that
reflect psychic 	disorder-jealousy, 	anger, 	selfishness, party
spirit, etc. (Gal. 5:19-21). 	So, too, the fruit of the Spirit is
depicted 	in terms of positive inner congruence with social
relationships 	that 	are 	edifying 	and 	upbuilding-love, 	joy,
peace, gentleness, kindness, etc. (Gal. 5:22-23).
Now, Jay Adams would certainly agree that biblical practice is

-- 8 of 91 --

COUNSELINGTHE WHOLEPERSON 	37
what is desired as the outcome of counseling. He differs from
the model presented in that he gives greater therapeutic agency
to 	the 	cognitive-spiritual 	as 	the 	source 	of psycho-personal
health. We are suggesting, instead, that dysfunction at the social,
personal, sexual, or psychical subsystem of the self can hinder
spiritual development and so undermine biblical practice as a
way of wholistic and godly living. This model makes room for
legitimate therapeutic focus on one or more of the subsystems as
a way of facilitating spiritual and personal development. The
health, ecological wholeness, or holiness of the person is thus
represented by the orientation of the spirit through all the other
subsystems toward God, who is Spirit, and to the other, as "soul
mate," or "help meet," as the Scripture says (Gen. 2:18 KJV).	4
Figure 	1 also 	shows 	that 	the 	physical 	and 	nonphysical
(mental) aspects 	of the 	self are 	connected 	to each 	of the
components of the self. This serves to preserve a balance and
positive tension between the physical and mental aspects of the
personality for each of the components. If the spujtual dimen-
sion should be moved to the side and relate primarily through
the mental side of the self, the religious self will become either
rationalistic 	or mystical-both 	essentially 	movements 	away
from the concreteness and embodiedness 	of the self.
In the same way, there are both physical and mental aspects to
a healthy 	psychical 	and 	sexual life. 	Should 	these 	become
primarily 	either 	physical 	or 	mental. 	this 	will 	represent 	a
distortion and dysfunction for the self in its process of growth
and development. What can be called therapeutic 	gains in a
clinical sense are corrections made in the various subsystems of
the sel£ These corrections facilitate positive relations among the
systems. A variety 	of therapeutic 	strategies 	will 	be 	used,
depending 	on the 	specific therapeutic 	gain to be achieved
within each subset. For example, behavior modification works
well where there are cause-and-effect mechanisms that contrib-
ute to the functioning of a subsystem. Biofeedback techniques
recognize the systemic connection between 	the physical and
psychical subsystems. Psychoanalytic-oriented therapy can un-
cover factors that are repressed 	in identity formation. Object
relations psychology can provide new therapeutic strategies for
persons who lack positive identity formation and continuity.5
Counseling the whole person thus means an approach that is
informed by this systems-and-developmental model of person-

-- 9 of 91 --

38 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
hood as an integrative whole. The image of God is viewed as a
positive 	orientation 	to self as essentially 	good, to others as a
context for self-development 	and fulfillment, and to God as a
measure 	of personal 	and social health.
In 	this 	section 	we 	have 	described 	the 	human 	person 	as
integrative 	by virtue 	of a core humanity 	that is-
• 	Developmental 	in its growth toward maturity in the image
of God-first 	social, then personal, 	sexual, psychical, and
finally spiritual;
• 	Systemic in nature, with each component 	contributing 	to
the 	whole-both 	mental 	and physical 	combining 	in the
"gestalt" 	of the self;
• 	Spiritually open and growing through the integration of the
self 	with 	itself, 	with 	others, 	and 	toward 	God-making
personal 	humanity 	the core of spirituality 	and health.
The Ecology of the Self 	A Therapeutic 	Model
Our analysis of the dynamics of the self from an integrative
and developmental 	perspective, 	as described 	in figure 1, con-
tains an implicit ecological structure that needs to become more
explicit as a therapeutic 	model. The concept of ecology in the
most general sense simply means the relationship 	of an organ-
ism to its environment, or to a structure of interactive forces that
mutually determine 	both the organism and its environment. 	In
psychology the term was initiated by Allen Wicker in Introduc-
tion to Ecological Psychology.6 The term is being used here in a
nontechnical 	sense 	to 	describe 	the 	interaction 	of the 	three
spheres of the self in its embodied existence, its existence with
and for the other person(s), and its existence as spiritual being
related 	to God.
The unity of the self is experienced as a process of integration,
with both self identity 	and self activity (behavior) congruent
with the three 	ecological spheres, 	as shown in figure 2.
The 	core of the 	self is present 	in each 	of the 	ecological
spheres-the 	physical, social, and spiritual. The self can also be
called the "soul" 	in a theological 	sense as distinguished 	from
the "soul" 	of animals 	in a more general 	sense. 	In a biblical
anthropology, 	both human and nonhuman 	creatures 	possess a
creaturely "soul," by which is meant the basic life principle 	or

-- 10 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	39
SPHERES OF THE SELF
SELF .. EC------- 	slial 	sphere 	BEHAVIORS
~---~	(Soul/psyche 	$
Spiritual sphere
Figure 2
source. (The Hebrew term, used of both humans and animals, is
nephesh.) 1 The human soul is the orientation of the total self as a
physical, social, and spiritual being toward God as source and
destiny. Charles V. Gerkin describes the self as "soul" in such a
way as to include the various psychological concepts.
To use the designation self is to emphasize the line of experienced
continuity and interpretive capacity which emerges from the selfs
object relations. To use the term ego is to emphasize the coming
together of a nexus of forces demanding mediation and compro-
mise •••. 	The term soul is here used as a theological term that
points to the selfs 	central core subject to the ego's conflicting
forces and to the ultimate origins of the self in God. The soul is the
gift of God bestowed upon the individual with the breath of life. It
is thus the self, including its ego conflicts, as seen from an ultimate
perspective-the 	perspective of the self as nurtured and sustained
in the life of God.s
In figure 2, the self is identified as the psyche, the Greek word
used in the New Testament for "soul," or the life of the self. It is
used to describe the inner state of Jesus as he contemplates the
cross: "Now is my soul [psyche] troubled. And what shall I say?
'Father, save me from this hour'? No, for this purpose I have
come to this hour" Gohn 12:27). The deep ambivalence (or "ego
conflicts," as Gerkin describes it) is felt by Jesus in the core of
his very being, expressed by the term psyche, or soul. Jesus
resolved this ambivalence, achieving unity of the self (soul) by
integrating the perceived loss at the physical level and at the
social level into a behavior that gave meaning to pain, suffering,
and loss of life itself.
Earlier we used the term psyche in figure 1 to represent the
capacity for feelings as distinguished from the personal, social,

-- 11 of 91 --

40 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
sexual, and spiritual 	aspects 	of the 	self. Here 	we are using
psyche in a broader sense as equivalent to the self, or soul as the
center 	and source of the life of the person. Thus there 	is a
psychical dimension to the physical, social, and spiritual life of
the 	self as depicted 	in figure 2. This 	is done 	to show the
ecological relationship between the three spheres of the self as
the experienced 	self in the world and with others.
Several things emerge from this ecological matrix of the self in
the three 	spheres of its existence. First, the self (soul) in its
totality is present in each of the spheres. If one's life (soul) is
reduced to virtually a physical existence, with the loss of social
relationships and even loss of spiritual perception of God ("My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"), then the soul, or
the selfhood of the person, is fully present up to the point of the
spirit's being separated from the body (death). Likewise, the
social and 	spiritual 	spheres 	each 	represents 	the 	self in its
totality. Yet the nature of the ecological matrix of personhood is
such that no single sphere can stand alone as the reality of the
self. For example, if a person should go into a coma and be
unable to respond at the social or spiritual level, we would still
view the person as a total "self" rather than merely a physical
being. 	But 	scientists 	have 	demonstrated 	that 	the 	personal
development of the infant is linked with the physical bonding
that 	occurs through 	being 	held 	and 	touched 	from the 	very
beginning. 	This is what is meant by the ecological matrix in
which 	the 	self 	experiences 	itself 	as 	physical, 	social, 	and
spiritual.
Second, we must say that any pathology or disorder of the self
in one or more of the spheres affects the self in all spheres. This
explains why one cannot bless the "soul" of a person who is
hungry 	without 	giving 	that 	person 	something 	to eat. 	"If 	a
brother or sister is ill-clad and in lack of daily food, and one of
you says to them, 'Go in peace, be warmed and filled,' without
giving them 	the 	things 	needed 	for the 	body, what 	does 	it
profit?" Oames 2:15-16). 	The answer is, of course, it does not
profit! If one claims a spiritual relationship 	with God so that
"God's 	love abides 	in 	him," 	but 	does 	not provide 	for the
physical needs of a brother or sister and instead "closes his heart
against him," God's love cannot abide in him (1 John 3:17)1
In the same way, we could say that to provide for the physical
needs 	of a person and yet deprive 	him or her of social and

-- 12 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	41
spiritual health is to violate the soul or very self of the person.
The ecological spheres of the self not only mean that the self is
present in each sphere, but that each sphere is essential to some
degree to the health and wholeness of the self.
Third, we may say that no authentic approach to the self can
bypass the ecological matrix as embodied, social, and spiritual
existence. A "psychology" that seeks to describe the self and
prescribe therapeutic aid for the self only in terms of the psyche
as disembodied, 	impersonal, and nonspiritual selfhood cannot
measure up to a "Christian psychology" that understands 	the
self (soul) in this threefold way.
Fourth, we may say that there will ordinarily be pathologies
that are quite specific to each of the three ecological spheres,
even though the behavioral symptoms may appear in any of
them. For example, a disorder that is essentially biological in
origin due to, say, hormonal or chemical imbalance may cause a
depression of the self so as to impair function at the social and
spiritual levels. One may feel that "God has abandoned" 	the
self, or that withdrawal from social relationships 	is the only
escape, while the etiology of the problem may be primarily
biological rather than spiritual. The ecological nature of the self
results 	in this 	"pathological 	spillover," 	with the 	result 	that
diagnosis becomes 	more complex than 	merely 	observing 	or
noting symptoms.
The Christian who counsels will be open to the possibility
that the 	source of the problem may be in any of the three
spheres 	and will use therapeutic 	strategies accordingly. Not
every disorder or problem of human behavior can be charged to
spiritual failure, any more than all problems can be assumed to
have a biological cause. Yet, to include spiritual openness and
health 	as part 	of the 	therapeutic 	goal is not 	considered 	a
violation of therapeutic 	and clinical practice for the Christian
psychologist. So also, a wholistic counseling approach should be
able to discern pathology at the spiritual level of the self and
provide 	appropriate 	therapy. 	Here 	might 	be 	the 	place 	for
dealing with guilt and forgiveness, for example.
A person caught in the trap of self-hatred or low self-esteem
can express symptoms that might appear in any of the three
spheres. Often the person projects God's judgment, internalizes
and reinforces it, and uses self-condemnation as a means of
atonement. In other cases, low self-esteem appears as a dysfunc-

-- 13 of 91 --

42 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
tion in interpersonal 	relationships or can even produce symp-
toms of a physical nature. The self is failing in its attempt to
achieve integration and wholeness. A therapist specializing in
some form of ego psychology, or psychoanalysis, may be able to
trace the patterns of the pathology and attempt therapy through
a repatterning 	of the ego and enabling of the self to function
more effectively and wholistically. There 	is no reason why a
Christian therapist cannot offer this kind of help if adequately
trained and certified.
All people 	get well for the same reason, regardless 	of the
therapeutic method used I The source of healing is in the person,
not the therapist or counselor. "Psychotherapy 	does not cure
patients," suggests Thomas Paolino. "The capacity for cure lies
within each patient."9 Facilitating a movement toward health in
one sphere may release the self to grow toward health in another
sphere. The "ego" as a specific subject of psychological atten-
tion lies between the self and its lived experience in the world.
When the self is addressed 	and responds 	at the level of its
spiritual sphere, the "ego" of the self is also touched and healed.
As we shall see later, effective mediation of God's grace not only
is a spiritual means for healing, but touches the very core of the
human self, enabling it and assisting it in the integrative task of
becoming whole.10
In this section we have attempted 	to show how the 	core
anthropological model as depicted in figure 1 can be construed
as a therapeutic model as in figure 2. No attempt has been made
to 	relate 	specific therapeutic 	theories 	and 	methods 	to 	this
model, but instead we have sought to show how a variety of
theories and models may be used within this model when the
ecological interactions of the human self are understood in this
threefold 	way. The 	ecological matrix provides 	a therapeutic
model that depicts the integrative 	task of the self as-
• 	Open 	to growth 	in 	each 	sphere, 	as a physical, 	social,
spiritual person;
• 	Known to self and 	others 	as the 	same person 	in 	each
sphere;
• 	Developing 	psychological 	(ego) strength 	and 	health 	as
measured 	by positive 	interrelationship 	among the 	three
spheres.
The connection of the self to its life as a set of behaviors is

-- 14 of 91 --

COUNSELING mE 	WHOLE PERSON 	43
what now must be considered as a life continuum and context
for therapy.
The Life Continuum as Context for 	Therapy
The life of the self, of course, cannot be neatly diagrammed
and displayed in a figure, as we have attempted to do. Each
person's life is a pilgrimage of the self, a narrative created by the
events 	that 	are 	experienced 	and 	the 	way 	in 	which 	these
experiences are integrated into the identity of the self.11 In Peter
Shaffer's play Equus, the psychiatrist, Martin Dysart, has been
treating 	a 	boy 	who 	blinded 	several 	horses 	in 	a psychotic
episode. Through the treatment the psychiatrist discovers that
the boy at an early age had become obsessed with horses when
his atheist father substituted the picture of the head of a horse in
his room for a picture of Christ. Now the boy experiences God as
Equus, 	viewing him, calling him to worship, and ultimately
judging him through the eyes of horses. Dysart, in reflecting on
this phenomenon 	of self formation, says:
A Child is born into a world of phenomena all equal in their power
to enslave. It sniffs-it 	sucks-it 	strokes its eyes over the whole
uncomfortable range. Suddenly one strikes. Why? Moments snap
together like magnets, forging a chain of shackles. Why? I can trace
them. I can even, with time, pull them apart again. But why at the
start 	they 	were 	ever 	magnetized 	at all-just 	those 	particular
moments of experience and no others-I 	don't know. And nor does
anyone else. Yeti/I 	don't know-if 	I can never know that-then
what am I doing here? And I don't mean clinically doing or
socially doing-I 	mean fundamentally/ 	These questions, these
Whys, are fundamental-yet 	they have no place in a consulting
room.12
The life of the self in the process from being to becoming is a
precarious and even treacherous 	path, as we have said. Yet,
given the right context, it is also a path of growth, healing, and
discovery. 	The 	larger 	context 	of 	life 	provides 	therapeutic
resources, sometimes minimally and sometimes adequately. In
this broad context, therapy 	means not only healing, but the
growth of the self into its fullest potential, regarding oneself
positively as an integrative "gestalt" of body and soul. It is also
to 	experience 	the 	self 	as 	affirmed 	and 	valued 	by 	others,
including 	the 	reality 	of trust, 	loyalty, 	and 	shared 	life 	in

-- 15 of 91 --

44 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
community. So, too, this integrative, therapeutic context of life is
meant 	to include 	spiritual 	values 	realized 	through 	worship,
prayer, the peace and grace of God, and hope as assurance of
ultimate value of the self as upheld by God beyond this life.
We recall here the threefold integrative task as discussed in
the previous chapter. There is integration as embodied soul, as
related self, and as the competence to integrate embodied and
related 	self to God as the source of the human spirit.
The idea of life as pilgrimage is a therapeutic continuum for
all persons when considered in this perspective. This therapeu-
tic continuum stretches from the most informal caregiving that
takes place through domestic, community, and friendship 	en-
counters 	to the more specialized 	forms of pastoral care and
psychotherapy in a clinical setting. On this continuum, counsel-
ing is a form of support and, if needed, intervention for enabling
persons 	to grow toward health. 	The 	resources 	used 	by the
professional 	counselor 	may be 	more 	narrowly 	defined 	and
focused, but the process of healing is the same. All persons get
well for the same reason, regardless of the therapeutic method
used. Getting well in this case means recovering the therapeutic
process 	of life itself. The only source of healing 	is in the person
being 	healed, 	though 	the 	process 	may 	depend 	on 	skilled
intervention 	with appropriate 	therapeutic 	methods.
In many instances the New Testament uses the same word for
salvation 	as 	for 	healing. 	The 	Greek 	word 	soteria 	can 	be
translated "salvation" or "healing," 	depending 	on the context.
But the word therapeuo is also used to describe an act of healing
ministry 	by 	Jesus 	(Matt. 	9:35). This 	shows 	that 	salvation
includes therapy as one means to the gift of life at its fullest.
We will look at three aspects of this pilgrimage of the self as a
context for therapy: self formation, self socialization, and self
fulfillment.
Self Formation: The Hermeneutical Task
The term hermeneutics comes from the Greek name for the
god Hermes, son of Zeus, who served as the messenger of the
gods. According to Greek mythology, Hermes gave increase to
herds and guarded boundaries and roads. He was also the god of
science and invention, of eloquence, 	of cunning and trickery
and theft, of luck and treasure-trove. 	He even conducted 	the

-- 16 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	45
dead to Hades. Indeed, 	Hermes seems to resemble a modem
pastoral counselor!
In a more technical sense, hermeneutics 	is a form of literary
critique 	in 	which 	the 	meaning 	of a text 	is interpreted 	in
accordance with its intent and purpose. Here the term repre-
sents the formation of the self as it "interprets" 	the events and
experiences 	of life.
At the beginning 	of this chapter we mentioned 	Andrew, a
young man with AIDS, a life-threatening disease. We spoke of
his response as a "therapeutic redefinition" of his life when he
protested 	that he was not dying with AIDS, but living with
AIDS. How was he able to do this? Did he suddenly acquire this
therapeutic skill? Hardly. The capacity to be open to "bad luck"
as well as "good fortune" 	is evidence 	of a "hermeneutical"
approach to life whereby the self possesses a core of positive
values that transcend sheer facts such as disease or even death.
The self actually interprets facts and experiences according to
its core values. Where the formation of the self has resulted in
core values that are inherently 	positive and open to change,
there will be a capacity to interpret even negative experiences
in a therapeutic or healing way. This is done by accepting those
experiences for what they are and building them into the larger
goals of the self. For Andrew, it means to view each day as a day
of living rather than as a day of dying.
The apostle Paul, when confronted with his personal "thorn
in the flesh," found that it could not be removed through prayer.
He concluded that he was given grace sufficient to live with it
(2 Cor. 12:7-9). Not simply enduring this problem, Paul added,
"I will all the more gladly boast of my weaknesses, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me." Paul's self formation had
taken root at the reality of God's love for him. Given the chance,
he would still have preferred to live without the weakness. Yet
he did not become morbidly attached to his deformity. Instead,
he "made it fit" into the more wholistic pattern of his life. It
sounds so simple! But how did he do it?
The hermeneutical task for Paul as a basis for his therapeutic
redefinition under adversity had begun years earlier when he
came to believe 	that he had been 	set apart for this ministry
"before 	I was born" 	(Gal. 1:15)1 Through 	the 	process 	of a
conversion to Jesus as the Messiah there was also a conversion
of Jesus of Nazareth into the inner life of Saul of Tarsus. Now

-- 17 of 91 --

46 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
the apostle Paul is able to project in a retrospective 	way his
"story of conversion" back to his core identity. This therapeutic
redefinition did not cast out the "old Saur' 	in favor of a "new
Paul." Rather, an incredible continuity was established 	for him
in his core identity, 	going back to his very conception. 	This
enabled 	him to take responsibility 	for persecuting 	Christians.
Many Christians 	apparently 	lost their lives through his zeal!
Having made 	these 	wrong and hurtful 	actions part of the
whole of his life, Paul gained the capacity to include suffering
and continued 	pain as part of the whole. We are not told how
this happened. 	But it is worth noting that when he did arrive in
Jerusalem after his startling conversion, the disciples were not
prepared 	to receive him. It was Barnabas, whose name means
"son of consolation," who interceded 	for him with those same
disciples 	(Acts 9:26-30). 	It sounds so easy! But we can well
imagine the "counseling" that Barnabas had to do to enable Paul
to cope with this rejection and to enable the disciples to trust
their very lives to Paul.
One of the contributions 	of object relations psychology as a
therapeutic 	approach 	has been 	precisely 	in this area of self
formation through relation to "objects" 	that remain present 	to
the self despite 	discontinuity, 	separation, or deprivation 	for a
time. 13 Charles Gerkin, who bases his counseling approach on
object relations 	theory, says:
To extend D. W. Winnicott's language, it is the role of interpreta-
tion to sustain and solidify the line of continuing existence that
provides the self with a sense of continuity at all levels of its
functioning. The line of life becomes a line of interpretation-the
hermeneutics of the self. Within a theological perspective I would
place that process at the center of the life of the soul in all its
relationships.1•
The 	Scriptures 	tell us that Jesus, 	in the days of his flesh,
"offered up prayers and supplications, with loud cries and tears,
to him who was able to save him from death" (Heb. 5:7). This
strong language describes quite clearly the psychic trauma and
pain that Jesus experienced 	when confronted with the inevita-
bility of the cross. At the very least this encourages us to know
that such turmoil 	and pain are not due to sin, nor are they
contrary to our basic human 	spirit 	A wholistic 	view 	of the

-- 18 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	47
person must include such terrible depths of fear and pain if it is
to be authentically 	in touch with persons in need.
Yet the author of Hebrews goes on to say of this same Jesus
that "for the joy that was set before him [he] endured the cross,
despising 	the 	shame" 	(Heb. 	12:2). Can 	people 	who 	have
encountered 	the shame of physical, sexual, or emotional viola-
tion actually learn to "despise the shame"? Only if the core of
the self experiences love as a powerful therapeutic redefinition
of the self as a constant and continual reality. For shame is
fundamentally a matter of self-interpretation. "Although he was
a Son, he learned 	obedience," 	writes the author of Hebrews
(Heb. 5:8). Read another way, it means that precisely because he
knew himself to be the beloved 	Son of the Father, he could
accept with humility and dignity the obedience 	that kept him
faithful, even to experience 	the shameful and dreadful death
upon 	a cross. "Despising 	the 	shame" 	is not hating 	it, but
reinterpreting 	it as pain. Pain can be healed when attached to a
meaningful purpose-it 	is called redemption. Shame can never
be 	healed 	as long as it is the 	selfs 	interpretation 	of itself.
Turning shame into pain, and pain into creative suffering, is a
way of experiencing redemption and becoming a child of God.
The traditional theological approach has been to interpret the
atoning death and resurrection of Jesus Christ as offering pardon
from sin. C. Norman Kraus suggests that the removal of sin as an
objective offense standing between 	God and humans does not
yet remove shame as the deeper 	problem of the human self.
Shame means that one has suffered loss of being, not merely loss
of status. The purpose 	of divine forgiveness is not merely to
pardon sin as a legal or objective fault, but to overcome shame,
which has weakened and destroyed the inner being of the self.15
Counseling 	from a Christian 	perspective 	can bring to the
therapeutic sessions, in a narrower, more clinical sense, a basis
for the broader formation of the self as a life pilgrimage. This can
be a therapeutic process in which continuity is restored through
a vision and experience 	of God as the 	"object" 	of the 	self
formation present to the self even in those earlier experiences
that "split" the self off from its task of becoming a whole person.
The specific therapeutic 	techniques 	to be used in this case, of
course, are beyond 	the 	scope of this book. What I hope 	to
provide 	here 	is a theological 	basis 	for clinical 	therapy 	that
approaches the person on the life continuum of self formation.

-- 19 of 91 --

48 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Self Socialization: The Narrative Task
The process of self interpretation 	described 	above can be
viewed as a taskof creating the script or narrative for one's own
story. Forming personal 	identity 	through 	narrative 	has been
described helpfully by Stanley Hauerwas in his book A Commu-
nity of Character:
The necessary existence of the other for my own self is but a
reminder that the self is not something we create, but is a gift.
Thus we become who we are through the embodiment of the story
in the communities in which we are born. What is crucial is not
that we find some way to free ourselves from such stories or
community, but that the 	story which grasps us through our
community is true. And at least one indication of the truthfulness
of a community's story is how it forces me to live in it in a manner
that gives me the skill to take responsibility for my character.16
The life continuum is a process of socialization of the self.
Hauerwas suggests that the concept of story can be a way of
defining 	the 	concepts, 	values, 	and 	experiences 	that 	shape
personal 	identity, 	for better 	or for worse. In this sense, the
ecological matrix of the self, as displayed 	in figure 2, points
toward 	behavior 	as necessarily 	understood 	in 	a context 	of
socialization, 	or community. 	We 	express 	ourselves 	through
forms of behavior that are physical, social, and spiritual (reli-
gious). Yet specific forms of behavior are not directly related to
the 	self, but 	only indirectly, 	through 	the 	ecological matrix.
While the self is present as a totality in each sphere, each sphere
also contributes to the total "gestalt" of the self. Thus behavior
in one sphere must be understood 	in terms of the ecological
relationships 	of the three 	spheres.
This model also helps us to see that pathology in the form of
antisocial or self-destructive behavior may have its roots in the
lack of integrative self formation in the sense of having a "story"
that is truthful, to use Hauerwas's 	term.
One way of relating the Christian 	story to the therapeutic
process 	is by understanding 	the 	formation of the 	self as a
narrative task of developing a story that gives the self a core set
of values concerning oneself, others, and the future. Clinical
therapeutic techniques can then be contextualized by a culture
or context in which this Christian 	story is authenticated 	and
experienced as one's own story. This will be developed further

-- 20 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	49
in chapter 4. For now we see that the context of self formation as
a therapeutic process includes one's developing life story as
well as the story of one's future existence.
Self Fulfillment: The Eschatological Task
In theology the term eschatology simply means the study of
the final events that will take place at the end of the age. It
derives from the Greek word eschaton. which means "last." We
have stressed that the core values of the self include not only
values that relate to self-esteem, but values rooted in relation to
others and to the future. The life continuum as a context for
therapy includes the future as well as the past. Too often, I am
afraid, therapy 	has 	been 	oriented 	toward 	the 	factors and
experiences in one's past to the neglect of the future orientation
of the self. Counseling the whole person entails an approach
that includes future reality as impinging on the present as much
as does the past. Gerkin offers this explanation:
The level of acceptance of eschatological identity is often signaled
by a reduction in the selfs 	preoccupation with itself and a
concomitant enhancement in the selfs capacity for concern for and
participation with other persons.•.. 	Rather than being depleted
by the demands and pressures upon the self that threaten the selfs
existence, the self is increasingly nourished and fulfilled by
engagement with others in activities oriented toward the renewal
of life together 	in the spirit of the Kingdom.11
For the people of Israel in the Old Testament, as well as for
the early Christian community, there appeared to be a self-
conscious "therapy" 	in one's relationship to the community.
That is to say, for the Israelite, personal identity was bound up
in the corporate self of the community as related to the original
founders-Abraham 	and Sarah, for example. This relationship
was part of the socialization of the individual person through
ritual, story, and promise. But the very fact of promise pointed
the individual forward to a destiny that gave present value to the
sacrifices and struggles of everyday life.
The same can be said of the early New Testament Christian
community. Not only was the community founded upon the
memory of Jesus, with the rituals (baptism, Lord's Supper)
oriented back to his historical presence, but the community was
also looking forward toward its future signaled by the story of

-- 21 of 91 --

50 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
the resurrection 	and the promise of the coming of Christ to
gather his own people.
The biblical anthropology presented earlier was meant to lay
a foundation for this eschatological fulfillment of the person by
showing that everyone's life is oriented spiritually to God as a
core human value. The theological concept of eschatological
fulfillment through the coming of the kingdom of God and of
Jesus Christ, along with the promise of resurrection of the body,
is first of all a core value of the human self before it becomes a
religious, or even Christian, concept. The life continuum as a
context for therapy 	provides 	for the 	therapeutic 	use 	of the
Christian story of the kingdom of God and resurrection of the
body with eternal life as a core personal value.
The 	newspaper 	story that 	revealed 	Andrew•s therapeutic
interpretation of his life as a person with AIDS did not tell us
what "living with AIDS,, meant to him in terms of the ultimate
and future reality of his life beyond the almost certain death that
his disease would bring. We do not know to what extent his
personal integrative task incorporates the spiritual sphere-in
particular, 	the 	eschatological 	hope 	of resurrection 	through
personal relation to Jesus Christ. Certainly this dimension of his
life 	would 	provide 	additional 	resources 	for 	his 	continued
"hermeneutical,, task of facing each day as a living person rather
than a dying one.
Summary
In this chapter we have attempted to provide a theological
basis for counseling a person like Andrew as a whole person,
based on a biblical anthropology that includes the body and
mind in an integrative process of spiritual life oriented to God
and others. In figure 1 we presented 	an integrative model that
was developmental 	in its growth toward maturity, systemic in
nature by relating each component of the self to the other and
the whole, and spiritually open to God and the other as the core
of the sel£
The ecological matrix of the self was then presented as :figure
2, depicting the self relating to each sphere of life as embodied
self, social self, and spiritual sel£ This provides a therapeutic
basis for approaching the self through the behaviors related to
each 	sphere, 	using 	appropriate 	methods. 	In 	this 	model 	we

-- 22 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	51
discovered that the ego dysfunctions described by some psy-
chologists are related ecologically to the three spheres. One
implication 	of this 	is 	that 	healthy 	ego 	development 	in 	a
psychological sense is directly related to personal and spiritual
growth.
Finally, we have traced out the life continuum as a context for
therapy, showing the relevance of the Christian story to the life
story as a pilgrimage of the self in creating one's own story. The
growth of the self as an integrative project is a process of self
formation and self socialization, empowered by and sustained
by 	the 	eschatological reality 	of resurrection 	of the 	body,
reconstituted social relationships, and the spiritual reality of life
with God through Jesus Christ. This is what it means to be
created in and live out the image of God as the form of one's
own personal human story,
More simply put, the two chapters now completed have led us
to conclude that-
• 	Personal humanity is basically therapeutic by virtue of its
own integrative task;
• 	All people get well for the same reason, regardless of the
therapeutic method used;
• 	Spiritual life is grounded in authentic human life, so that
spiritual resources augment and complete the selfs move-
ment toward health;
• 	Each person is on a life continuum of growth with its own
therapeutic resources and context;
• 	Counselors do not cure people; the capacity for health lies
within each person.
We have not addressed 	the role of the counselor in this
therapeutic context and process. Intervention for the purpose of
effecting therapy and growth is almost a sacred task in light of
the high value we place on the sanctity of the self in developing
its own life and character. "We are born into other people's
intentions," 	wrote 	Theodore 	Roszak.is And even 	our 	good
intentions can violate the space that the self occupies and can
manipulate its growth to fit our ideas. Can Christians counsel so
as to produce change and growth without violating the person-
hood of another? We think so, and in 	the next chapter we
present our case.

-- 23 of 91 --

52 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Notes
1. I have developed 	the foundations for a biblical anthropology
more extensively in On Being Human (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1982).
Roger Hording argues that there may well be a "Christian psychology"
that informs pastoral care (The Tree of Healing: Psychological and
Biblical Foundations for Counseling and Pastoral Care [Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1988]). It is a "psychology that is deeply rooted in the way
God has made us" (19). While he does not elaborate on this at length,
he 	does 	provide 	a brief 	outline 	of what he considers 	a biblical
perspective on our humanity: "We have supreme value; we are living
unities; we have broken relationships; we are restorable" (245).
2. I have discussed 	the concept of co-humanity as part of the
paradigm of a biblical anthropology in On Being Human, chapter 4.
3. Jay Adams is dean of the Institute of Pastoral Studies and visiting
professor of practical theology at Westminster Theological Seminary in
Philadelphia. Among his more important publications are Competent to
Counsel (1970; reprint, Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1986); The Christian
Counselor's Manual (1973; reprint, Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1986);
More Than Redemption: A Theology of Christian Counseling (Grand
Rapids: Baker, 1979); and "Nouthetic Counseling," in Helping People
Grow, ed. Gary Collins (Ventura, Calif.: Vision House, 1980).
The controlling assumption for Adams is that divine counsel is the
only option for providing therapy and the Bible is the basic textbook for
counseling 	("Nouthetic 	Counseling," 	158). Nouthetic 	counseling 	is
based on the Greek verb noutheteo, " used by Paul in several instances
(e.g., 2 Tim. 3:15-17) 	to mean the kind of pastoral care that produces
change through verbal confrontation motivated by love, for the client's
health and God's glory (see Competent to Counsel, 51).
4. The concepts of "wholeness" 	and "holiness" 	have been the
subject of some discussion in the literature on integration in counsel-
ing. "Holiness" is taken to mean the particular character of a person as
the subject of sanctification, as in "sanctifying grace" applied through
the Holy Spirit. "Wholeness" 	is a more psychological term tending
toward functional well-being. The issue is whether or not one can be in
a state of "sanctification" or "grace" while at the same time lacking in
functional 	"wholeness." 	Those who hold that wholeness 	produces
holiness tend to assume that growth as a function of becoming a whole
person is what is meant by the theological term sanctification.
Professor Newton Malony at Fuller Seminary's graduate school of
psychology, for example, suggests that whole person incorporates both
psychological wholeness and spiritual holiness. "To be whole means to
be conscious of and adequate in all, not just some of life's environ-
ments" (Wholeness and Holiness: Readings in the Psychology/Theology
of Mental Health, ed. H. Newton Malony [Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983],

-- 24 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	53
20-21). Seward Hiltner suggests that the concept of ..health" includes
..cosmic wholeness," in which one's life may be in a state of harmony
with regard to the whole creation (..Salvation's Message about Health,"
in Wholeness and Holiness, 160).
My own view is that while wholeness as a psychological state is not a
presupposition of holiness as a spiritual state-as 	though good psycho-
logical health could ensure good personal or spiritual health-holiness
anticipates and seeks wholeness. I prefer not to set the terms in contrast
to each other, but rather to view both holiness and wholeness as part of
the tension between 	actuality of personal being and potential 	of
personal being so that one can grow in both holiness and wholeness
and yet be considered both ..whole" and ..holy" by virtue of being a
person created by God and as the object of God's grace and love.
5. For a helpful discussion of some of the forms of therapy currently
in use from a Christian perspective, see The Holy Spirit and Counsel-
ing: Theology and Theory, Marvin G. Gilbert and Raymond T. Brock,
eds. (Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson, 1985). Roger Hurding, in The Tree
of Healing, has produced an informative and critical review of the
secular psychologies and therapies, listing their basic assumptions,
aims, and methodologies, along with a discussion from a Christian
perspective. Hurding also includes an analysis and discussion of a
variety of Christian theories for counseling, making this one of the best
resource books available for pastors and Christian counselors.
6. Allen Wicker, Introduction to Ecological Psychology (Monterey,
Calif.: Brooks-Cole, 1979). Charles Gerkin also sees the context of self
development as an ecological relationship: ..The quality of the selfs
interpretation is not simply a product of its own individual effort. The
infant and mother (and/or other figures who share the mothering role)
together make up a social milieu, an ecology, which shapes a certain
cast to the •1am and you are' situation. The later development of partial
independence 	begins to shift more of the interpretive task onto the
developing self. But even into adulthood, the basis for interpretation of
the meaning of existence remains fundamentally social" (Gerkin, The
Living 	Human 	Document: 	Re-visioning Pastoral Counseling in a
Hermeneutical Mode [Nashville: Abingdon, 1984], 84-85).
7. For further discussion of the relation of soul to body and spirit,
see my book On Being Human, appendix A, 207-14.
8. Gerkin, The Living Human Document, 98.
9. Thomas Paolino, Jr., Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy (New York:
Brunner/Maze!, 1981), 13.
10. W. W. Meissner suggests that personal identity and spiritual
identity How out of the same ego source. Consequently the grace of
God, to produce spiritual growth, must also become the energizing
power of ego development (Life and Faith: Psychological Perspectives

-- 25 of 91 --

54 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
on Religious Experience [Washington, D.C.: Georgetown 	University
Press, 1987), 25ft). 	·
11. Gerkin conhibutes 	vitally to this discussion 	when he writes,
"Pastoral counseling undertaken in the hermeneutical 	mode [assumes]
the context of human life seen as pilgrimage set within a community
that shares a certain narrative vision or mythos concerning the whole
life in creation. The care provided by pastoral counseling is thus only
one aspect of a larger context of care provided by the community of
faith and life. Rather than 'treating' an 'illness• or 'solving' a 'problem,'
the pastoral counselor 	seeks to provide 	a more or less temporary
intensification of a process of care and prophetic ministry to persons
which the church in its ministry in other modes carries on with people
throughout 	their lives" (The Living Human Document, 178).
12. Peter Shaffer, Equus (New York: Avon, 1974).
13. The British school of object relations theory in the neo-Freudian
tradition includes such names as W. Ronald Fairburn, H. Gunhip, 	D.
W. Winnicott, and Melanie Klein. These theories sought to locate the
source of psychological problems in birth trauma and/or in the few
months immediately following birth, particularly in the infant's relation
to the parent (mother) as an object of attachment. The infant struggles to
internalize the mother object in a way that provides continuity through
the stages of separation and perceived abandonment. Successful object
internalization establishes an identity that can cope with change in the
object to which one relates without suffering anxiety or panic.
Frank Lake (1914-82) developed a monumental work attempting to
integrate object relations theory with Christian theology. This work,
titled Clinical Theology was first published in 1966 and has now been
published in an abridged form, edited by Martin H. Yeomans with the
same title, Clinical Theology: A Theological and Psychological Basis to
Clinical Pastoral Care (New York: Crossroad, 	1987). Lake's 	basic
model is a four-stage process of human development 	beginning with
acceptance 	(being) and nurture 	(well being) as the two input stages
experienced either positively or negatively during the first few months
of the infant's life. These are followed by the two output stages, status
and achievement. 	Failure to move through the first two stages due to
inadequate 	object internalization 	in the attachment/separation 	experi-
ence leads to "splitting" 	of the self, with a resulting schizoid reaction
(marked by withdrawal 	and death 	wish) or by a hysteric 	reaction
(marked by compulsive attachment or clinging). Central to his integra-
tive approach is the figure of Christ, who becomes a new "object" by
which one can pass through the stages of primal integration again and
emerge with a relatively healthy self identity formation leading to more
effective output in terms of status and achievement.

-- 26 of 91 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	55
For those willing to struggle with some of the technical and complex
concepts, the book provides a provocative text on integration.
14. Gerkin, The Living Human Document, 102.
15. C. Norman Kraus, Jesus Christ Our Lord: Christology from a
Disciple's Perspective (Scottdale, Pa.: Herald Press, 1987), 205-28.
Kraus says, "In no way can shame be expiated through substitutionary
compensation or retaliation .... 	Only a forgiveness which covers the
past and a genuine restoration of relationship can banish shame. What
is needed is a restoration of communication. The rage which isolates
and insulates must be overcome. Reconciliation and restoration of
mutual intimate relationship through a loving open exchange is the
only way to heal resentment and restore lost self-esteem" (211).
From a psychological perspective, John Bradshaw views shame as a
"toxic" form of low self worth, contributing heavily to various forms of
addictive and compulsive behavior. See Bradshaw On: Healing the
Shame That Binds You (Deerfield Beach, Fla.: Health Communica-
tions, 1988).
16. Stanley Hauerwas, A Community of Character (South Bend, In.:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), 148-49.
17. Gerkin, The Living Human Document, 189. The line between
spiritual direction and psychotherapy is recognized by Gerkin, but not
made an artificial or an absolute boundary. "Against that background of
the psychologizing of everyday concern with problems of living and
spiritualizing of religious life and devotion, the model of pastoral
counseling here proposed may be seen as an alternative lying some-
where between psychotherapy and spiritual direction. Fundamentally
concerned with the selfs pilgrimage through the problems and crises of
everyday relational life, the hermeneutical theory is simultaneously
concerned with the formation of that side of the selfs 	paradoxical
identity 	rooted and grounded 	in God and the inbreaking of the
Kingdom. Here, of course, the theory becomes openly and unashamed-
ly confessional. Insofar as the horizon of understanding brought by the
counselor to the counseling relationship is thus involved in confession-
al faith, to that extent it entails a form of spiritual direction. But insofar
as that horizon represents psychological ways of attending to the inner
and relational workings of the self, it is a clearly recognizable form of
psychotherapy. Partaking of both, the model, both in design and
intention, embraces a psycho-spiritual form of ministry" (192-93).
18. Theodore Roszak, Person/Planet (Garden City, N.Y.: Double-
day/Anchor, 1979), 139.

-- 27 of 91 --

3
The Counselor 	as
Growth Promoter
The violation of personhood begins in the cradle, if not in the
womb. We learn our names and our natures at their hands, and
they cannot teach us more than they know or will freely tell. Can
there be families whose love is not treason against our natural
vocation?1
Theodore 	Roszak has 	a high 	view 	of human 	nature 	and,
apparently, 	a low view of human nurture. 	He is right on one
count-the 	violation of personhood 	begins early and, to hear
some tell it, continues 	through 	most of the growing years.
All of us lose our innocence 	in the cradle. Before we know
how it happened, we discover a streak of perversity expressed as
rebellion 	toward those who claim to love us and who have to
live with us. Something 	in us has been 	betrayed-or 	is the
betrayer.
Is it a need to manipulate and control, disguised as love, that
constitutes 	the treason, as Roszak would have us believe? 	Or
would it be treason 	against our human 	potential 	to leave us
alone? Would it not be an act of betrayal never to penetrate the
wall of defenses and call us out into the open where healing and
growth can take place? Must not love and caregiving also be
therapeutic 	and 	corrective 	in order 	to be 	genuine 	love? Of
course! Those who love us best know this. But not all who love
know how to enter the closed self of another therapeutically.
And where 	the ordinary therapy 	of love in community is not
enough, 	an 	extraordinary 	therapy 	is 	needed, 	a practice 	of
56

-- 28 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	57
extraordinary love and care. This is what professional Christian
caregivers, counselors, and therapists 	strive to be and do.
Our purpose in this chapter is to examine more closely the
role 	of the 	counselor 	in 	helping 	persons 	to 	grow 	toward
wholeness. By Roszak' s terms, this is the role that comes close to
violating the integrity if not the sanctity of the personal life of
others. In the modern concept of the professional therapist there
is even more reason to question 	the value of such a role.
In the healing art, according to one psychiatrist, the doctor can
be seen as the "prescription." 2 Indeed, in the 1950s skeptics of
psychoanalysis 	were 	saying that 	many neurotic 	patients 	got
better without professional help and that psychotherapy did not
improve on this pattern! H. J. Eysenck, the British psychologist,
unsettled 	the therapeutic 	world with his paper published 	in
1952, "The 	effects 	of psychotherapy: 	an 	evaluation." 	Later
Eysenck stated that psychotherapy is like the "wondrous cure"
of the 	second-century 	physician 	Galen: 	"All who drink this
remedy recover in a short time, except for those whom it does
not 	help, 	who 	all 	die 	and 	have 	no 	relief 	from any 	other
medicine. Therefore, it is obvious that it fails only in incurable
cases." 3
Roger Hurtling, 	in commenting 	on this, reports that when
different 	aspects 	of the 	counseling 	relationship 	were 	being
studied 	some 	counselors 	and 	psychotherapists 	appeared 	to
facilitate improvement, others did not affect the outcome in any
significant way, and a third category actually seemed to make
the 	clients 	worse I The 	focus of inquiry 	then 	shifted to the
character 	and 	role 	of the 	therapist. 4 Nonetheless, 	Hurtling
suggests, there 	have always been 	special persons 	who have
provided 	the stimulus and direction 	for growth, though they
were not always recognized as professional caregivers. Caregiv-
ing, he argues, is as essential to human growth and development
as providing physical needs.
With Roszak' s warning in mind and with encouragement from
Hurtling, a thesis can be stated for this chapter: An effective
therapeutic intervention is one in which the client's motive
power to grow is facilitated 	by 	the 	counselor's perceived
presence as a partner in the growth process.
The anthropological framework for such a thesis has already
been established in the first two chapters. Humans are integra-
tive by nature, with the source of health and therapeutic growth

-- 29 of 91 --

58 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
found in one's own humanity. 	Openness 	to growth as personal,
social, and 	spiritual 	life constitutes 	our basic 	humanity. 	The
presence 	of the other is essential to this growth process; it is not
an intrusion 	or invasion.
We will discuss this thesis in four stages: (1) growth as a sign
of health; (2) the motive power for growth; (3) the counselor 	as
the human 	equation 	in therapy; 	and (4) the 	motive power 	of
love.
Growth 	as a Sign of Health
The ambiguity of such terms as health, wholeness, and growth
is a well-known 	problem 	in 	therapeutic 	literature. 	Clinical
pragmatism, 	says Allen Bergen, assimilates the dominant values
of a social 	system 	to help 	define 	the 	therapeutic 	goals and
clinical procedure. 	This approach seeks to diminish the patholo-
gies or disturbances 	defined 	by the clinician, 	who acts as an
agent of culture. 	Health 	is seen as the absence 	of pathology 	or
the 	removal 	of 	obstacles 	to 	growth, 	defined 	as 	functional
competence. 	On the other hand, 	Bergen 	suggests, 	humanistic
idealism appeals to philosophical 	and ideal values as inherently
good and necessary to a full human life. The clinician informed
by these 	values 	determines 	therapeutic 	goals based 	on these
values, which are based on the universal themes of humanity in
the abstract.
In this case, wholeness 	is not defined 	so much by functional
competence 	as by movement toward the "healthy" 	goals of ideal
human life. 5 Clinical pragmatism seeks adaptation to the prevail-
ing 	norms 	and 	values 	of 	the 	immediate 	cultural 	context.
Humanistic 	idealism 	tends 	to ignore 	the 	social 	and 	cultural
context in favor of abstract values set forth as norms by which
persons 	should 	measure 	their 	own 	success 	or 	failure. 	The
pragmatist 	sacrifices the ideal for the sake of conformity to the
contemporary 	pattern. 	"Don't 	feel guilty for doing what every-
one else is doing! If you feel better, then you are getting better."
The idealist 	discounts 	the value of what is historically 	real for
the sake of conformity 	to the universal 	ideal. 	"Don't 	think 	of
what you are, but what you can be! If you think right, you will
be all right." Of course these are stereotypes! 	But I suspect that
each 	position 	has 	its 	representatives 	and 	a 	corresponding
theology, 	even 	within 	the 	Christian 	approach 	to counseling.

-- 30 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	59
All therapists would probably agree that therapy is meant to
move a person toward a more integrated and positive approach
to life. The concept of growth or health may be used pragmati-
cally or idealistically to effect change and adjustment to life. Or
we can view growth and health from a more anthropological
perspective, 	such as we have attempted 	to describe 	in the
previous chapter. We believe 	that this is the way forward.
We certainly can say this: therapeutic 	gain is essentially a
forward 	movement 	that 	seeks 	to 	remove 	obstacles 	to 	that
movement. Growth as a therapeutic process then becomes more
of a functional term than a term with precise anthropological
content. As Carl Rogers notes, "Therapy is not a matter of doing
something to the individual, or of inducing him to do something
for himsel£ 	It is instead 	a matter of freeing him for normal
growth and development, of removing obstacles so that he can
move forward."6 I suspect 	that Rogers is informed more by
humanistic idealism than clinical pragmatism in his concept of
health. His optimism concerning the inherent value and poten-
tial of the self for growth strongly influences his therapeutic
method. I would agree that growth involves a person's move-
ment toward health, but I would assert that this is also a spiritual
process of dealing with one's need for divine grace.
Howard 	Clinebell, 	professor of pastoral counseling 	at the
School of Theology at Claremont, California, is well known for
his theory of "growth counseling." 	According to Clinebell, 	a
person's 	spiritual 	and 	personal 	growth 	includes 	awareness,
decision, freedom, meaning, commitment, quality of spiritual
life, and relation to God. This is a life-long process or "growth
journey" 	that 	never 	reaches 	a 	fixed 	goal. 	Growth 	toward
wholeness is sought in six interdependent 	aspects: enlivening of
the 	mind, 	refreshment 	of the 	body, enrichment 	of intimate
relationships, rapport with the environment, progress in relating
to institutions as well as others, and enhancement 	of personal
relationship 	with God.7 Clinebell's 	optimism concerning 	the
individual's orientation toward growth is only exceeded by his
breadth 	of reach in defining growth in terms of life's fullest
possibilities! At first glance it appears very much like my own
concept of the life continuum as therapeutic context. What is not
so clear is precisely what anthropological content is given to this
"growth journey."
Professor Newton Malony at the Fuller 	Seminary Graduate

-- 31 of 91 --

60 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
School of Psychology attempts to integrate personal wholeness
into the larger goals of spiritual holiness 	by drawing on the
concept of "life environments" 	as depicted 	by T. R. Sargin.
These 	environments 	are 	physical, 	situational, 	interpersonal,
idealistic, and transcendental. 	"The term whole person," says
Malony, "applies 	to 	this 	idea. 	To be 	whole 	means 	to 	be
conscious 	of and 	adequate 	in 	all, 	not just 	some, 	of life's
environments."s
Here we may have a combination of idealistic humanism and
clinical pragmatism! The 	concept 	of health 	or wholeness 	is
determined 	by a theory of life that includes the transcendental
or religious aspects of the self. Also, functional competence is
defined as being "adequate" in all of the life environments. This
integrative 	model 	has 	the 	advantage 	of including 	religious
values and goals in the therapeutic process, but it tends to blur
the 	distinction 	between 	clinical 	therapy 	and 	the 	life-long
process of personal and spiritual development. 	The effective-
ness of this model depends 	on the weight given to the term
adequate. If by adequacy Malony means a relative degree of
effectiveness in integrating each of the components into the life
of the self, then I tend to agree. To function adequately 	may
only 	require 	a minimal 	degree 	of competence. 	But 	if that
competence does not develop beyond "adequate," I am not sure
that 	we 	still 	have 	"health" 	and 	certainly 	not 	growth. 	The
questions remain.
The model we have chosen in this book relies more on a
biblical anthropology than either idealism or pragmatism. The
core 	paradigm 	of the 	person 	as presented 	in 	chapter 	2 is
repeated 	here for our reference.
GOD 	GOD
Physical <GI	pt 	~;~-:e~:;~;; 	i~~~Physical
Psy 	ic~ / 	~~syc 	ical
t Spi 'tual 	, Spi tual
SELF 	SELF
Figure 3

-- 32 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWfH PROMOTER 	61
In this model we may define growth as integrative, relational,
and open to change. The integrative dimension of growth is
measured 	by the selfs 	movement through the five stages of
development, 	beginning with the social and ending with the
spiritual. The integrative dimension means more than moving
through 	these 	stages 	"adequately," 	to 	use 	Malony's 	term.
Growth is not merely to arrive at any or all of the stages. Rather,
integrative growth is to keep these aspects of the self in balance
and integrated into the function of the self as a person. This
means that there will be congruence between the self as identity
and between the self as experienced in each area. For example,
integrative growth would be recognized by realistic emotions
and feelings at the psychical level fully congruent 	with the
expression of the self at the sexual and social levels. This aspect
of growth requires continual integrative processing of feelings,
actions, and core identity as an interpretive 	task. Or, as we
discussed in the previous chapter, it represents 	a therapeutic
redefining of the self when confronted by experiences at any
one of the five levels of personhood.
Bill, a sixteen-year-old high school student, had achieved a
satisfactory level of integrative competence. In moving through
adolescence he maintained healthy relationships with his peers,
learned to handle his strong sexual urges, experienced strongly
bonded relationships with his male friends, felt comfortable in
his earliest dating experiences with girls, and was active in a
campus-centered Bible study and in his church. At this point in
his life his developmental 	and integrative 	growth in social,
personal, 	sexual, psychical, 	and 	spiritual 	identity 	appeared
adequate. 	Now, four years later, not only has his integrative
growth stopped, but he is actually regressing.
After completing high school Bill left home and attended a
college 	where 	he 	was 	virtually 	unknown 	and 	lacked 	the
continuity of family, church, and friends. What was "adequate"
in terms of integration in high school is now quite inadequate.
The three (ecological) spheres of his life-physical, 	social, and
spiritual-have 	begun to crumble. He suffered a football injury
to his knee that will leave him with a permanent weakness, if
not a disability. 	His comfortable relation with girls and the
solidarity 	of 	male 	friends 	with 	whom 	he 	passed 	through
adolescence have now opened up into unknown areas of sexual
intimacy 	with 	expectations 	of 	life-long 	commitment. 	Male

-- 33 of 91 --

62 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
friendships 	are overlaid with competitiveness 	and insecurity.
Philosophical questions intrude into the simplistic assumptions
about a Bible that is to be taken on "faith alone." God seems to
recede into the distance when he is needed the most. A mild
depression and random thoughts of suicide signal Bill's disinte-
gration.
Meanwhile, Bill's physical therapist instructs him in proce-
dures for exercising his knee to prevent further injury and tells
him to stay out of contact sports. Bill also meets once a week
with a counselor to talk about his feelings of alienation and
depression. 	On a visit home he confides in his pastor, who
encourages him to "get back into fellowship with God" through
regular 	Bible reading 	and prayer. As a parting thought, 	the
pastor also suggests that Bill's knee injury might be God's way
of telling him to change his major to religion and think about
going into Christian ministry. Bill never did have the courage to
tell him that he no longer believed in God. Bill has many losses
to grieve; God is only one of them.
In each of the three ecological spheres Bill has a presenting
problem. The physical therapist, psychologist, or pastor each in
one's own way sees Bill primarily in terms of this problem. Each
has counsel to give and a certain professional expertise with
which to approach Bill. But it is Bill himself who will have to
recover the integrative task and begin to move forward through
growth and change. The role of a counselor now becomes much
more than applying therapeutic skills in one of the three spheres
of life. The very core of Bill's personal integration project has
become fragmented as he has moved out of the security of this
early context into his own world. Here 	is where 	our model
provides insight into the kind of growth and development that a
person like Bill needs 	to experience 	in order to recover his
integrative task.
In addition to the integrative growth of the self as depicted in
figure 3, there 	is a dimension 	of relational 	growth. This 	is
growth in terms of relationship to others, again with congruence
to the five developmental components-social, 	personal, sexual,
psychical, 	and 	spiritual. 	For example, 	as he 	has developed
sexually, integrating his sexual feelings with his personal, social,
and spiritual identity, Bill has also encountered other people in
each 	of these 	areas. 	In these 	new 	relationships 	he 	is very
vulnerable. Suddenly he experiences for the first time the shock

-- 34 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTHPROMOTER 	63
of being alone with himself. The easy familiarity with which he
experienced himself as a social, personal, sexual, psychical, and
spiritual being is no longer present now that the familiar context
is gone. The others whom he encounters 	move quickly from
being 	strangers to being 	roommates, classmates, or drinking
mates, with little time for exploring the history and context of
the 	self. He is drawn to others or repelled 	by them, like a
magnetic force. He dares not allow the psychic pain of loneli-
ness and grief over a loss to intrude 	into the camaraderie of
social life in the 	dormitory. The psychic, social, and sexual
become compartmentalized within Bill because his encounters
with others are primarily one-dimensional. Bill is increasing the
tempo and intensity of his life, but is losing the inner connec-
tedness.
As a case in point, in his first experiences of intimacy with
females outside the familiar structures of his family, friends, and
male companions, 	Bill may find the 	physical 	immediacy 	of
sexual encounter a powerful funnel through which he can pour
his 	social, personal, 	psychical, 	and 	even 	spiritual 	needs 	in
search of fulfillment. But what feels like integration of the self
actually becomes disintegration. 	What is experienced 	as inti-
macy and closeness actually becomes a complicated negotiation
of meeting 	needs 	while maintaining 	distance. Growth stops,
integration fragments, and the self desperately seeks compensa-
tory strategies to survive. Bill radically changes his personality
and lifestyle. But this is change without growth, progression
without development, 	and fusion without integration.
By telling the story of Bill, we have fleshed out the schematic
model 	of integrative 	growth as a sign of movement 	toward
health. The growth of the self is both integrative and relational.
Bill experienced 	the first, but lost it when he failed to make
relational growth. Relational growth as measured by this model
of personhood is simultaneously integrative growth with respect
to the selfs congruence with itself in all areas. Here, too, growth
will be expressed as therapeutic redefinition, or interpretation,
as relationships constantly present new experiences of the self
and others.
Openness to change lies at the very heart of growth. When-
ever a person 	is open to change, there 	is growth potential.
However, change alone is not necessarily growth, for change
may merely be alteration in behavior without the two dimen-

-- 35 of 91 --

64 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
sions of growth discussed above. We saw clearly in Bill's case
that growth must be both integrative 	and relational. 	Growth
begins 	with openness 	to change; 	without 	it, integrative 	and
relational growth simply cannot occur. The forward movement
of growth toward health has anthropological content and charac-
ter, as our model suggests. It is realistic, not merely idealistic;
transformative, not merely adaptive and pragmatic.
Here, then, is our definition of growth as a sign of health:
• 	The 	development 	of the 	self in terms 	of core identity,
integrating 	the 	social, 	personal, 	sexual, 	psychical, 	and
spiritual;
• 	The relatedness of the self to others in such a way that the
core integration 	remains intact;
• 	Openness 	to change as a condition of integrative growth
and as the basis of therapeutic 	growth toward health.
The Motive Power for Growth
Effecting 	change 	in 	the 	personality 	dynamics 	of another
person constantly challenges the therapeutic 	skills of a coun-
selor or pastor. Sometimes pathology 	seems to be the 	most
stable 	condition 	of all organic life. Resistance 	to change 	is
rooted in the very nature of pathological structures. A neurosis is
cunning and highly adaptable, able to make adjustments with
computerlike 	speed 	to retain 	its own 	set of defenses. 	This
instinctive adaptability can easily deceive the unwary counselor
into thinking that growth is occurring when actually the patient
has only adjusted 	his or her behavior 	to relieve 	therapeutic
stress.
In a public lecture in the late 1960s the psychiatrist Viktor
Frankl told of his transition from psychoanalytic therapy to what
came to be called logotherapy. "I discovered that many patients
were unwilling to terminate therapy, even after long periods,"
said Frankl, "because they lacked a positive will to meaning in
their life. The thing that they feared the most was being well.
Their sickness at least gave them a project on which they could
focus their attention." Frankl's existentially oriented psychology
led 	him 	to 	develop 	what 	he 	called 	a 	"psychotherapeutic
anthropology" 	that precedes 	all psychotherapy. 9 What Frankl
saw as untapped in the traditional psychotherapy was the role of

-- 36 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	65
the human 	spirit in positing a "will to meaning." 	This move-
ment of the spirit can be understood 	as the core motive of the
self in growth and openness 	to change.
The function of spirit as essential to the life and power of the
person is consistently 	depicted 	in the Bible as a life force that
issues out of the "heart," 	or the inner life of the person. One
cannot cut away the life of the spirit as a "religious 	appendix"
that serves no necessary 	function. "This means that the spirit
must be distinguished 	from the soul or psyche," writes theolo-
gian 	Helmut 	Thielicke. 	"It 	must 	not 	be 	psychologically 	or
psychopathologically 	derived 	from the psyche."10
The heart in biblical psychology appears to be the source and
center of the person's imagination, intentions, will, and actions.
Indeed, 	when the heart has become evil, then all of a person's
thoughts and actions become sick and "unholy," 	or "unclean"
(cf. Prov. 4:23; 6:18). David asks God not to remove his Holy
Spirit from him and to create in him a new heart (Ps. 51:10-11).
Jesus reminds his disciples that one does not become "unclean"
through that which enters into the self; instead, what comes out
of the 	self, out of the 	heart, 	makes one unclean: 	"For 	from
within, out of the heart of man, come evil thoughts, fornication,
theft, 	murder, 	adultery, 	coveting, 	wickedness, 	deceit, 	licen-
tiousness, envy, slander, pride, foolishness" 	(Mark 7:21-22). In
the 	same way, one is responsible 	to "keep 	one's 	heart," 	for
"from it How the springs of life" (Prov. 4:23). The source of the
heart's positive and "healthy" 	motivations comes from a "new
and right spirit" 	(Ps. 51:10).
What the 	Hebrew 	language 	meant 	when 	referring 	to the
"heart" (Zeb)as the center and source oflife, is what is meant by
the psycho-spiritual 	dynamics 	of the 	sel£ The way a person
"thinks" 	in this construct is not separated 	from who one is or
how 	one feels. 	Rather, 	the 	conceptual 	and 	cognitive 	life is
linked with the feelings, instincts, and motives of the person as
embodied 	soul and ensouled body. The "heart" 	is expressed in
actions that reveal motives and intentions. 	It is the core of the
self in the most fundamental 	and comprehensive 	sense. The
biblical concept of the heart is close to what I earlier called the
"soul" 	as the core or center of the self. I thinkthat the Greek
word psyche as used in the New Testament can also be seen as
representing 	this center 	of the life of the self.
When considered 	from this anthropological 	perspective, 	the

-- 37 of 91 --

66 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
self is inner driven, not stimulus-response controlled. There is a
stimulus-response 	factor that 	is 	appropriate 	to 	each 	of the
subsystems of the self, by which certain changes in behavior can
be produced. Specific therapeutic gains can often be produced
through an intervention 	that makes use of this dynamic. But
when we seek the motive power for growth as openness 	to
change, we must probe deeper into the self than the psyche, as
Frankl has reminded us. It is the self as spirit that integrates the
various facets of personhood and produces openness to change.
How is the human spirit encountered therapeutically so as to
release motive power for change and growth? In Dynamics in
Pastoring, a work that has already become a standard reference
in the field of pastoral theology, the Dutch scholar Jacob Firet
offers us a model.11 Firet's 	concern is for what he calls role
fulfillment for the pastor. Because pastoral care is part of this
task, what Firet says can also be applied to the entire continuum
of counseling as we have understood it in this book. For it is in
the dynamics of the growing and changing person that a ministry
of the Word of God is made effective.
Firet distinguishes between the "hermeneutic 	moment" as a
moment of understanding 	and the 	"agogic moment" 	as the
moment of change and growth. What does this mean? We have
already discussed the formation of the self as a hermeneutical
task. That is, it is the task of reinterpreting the self therapeutical-
ly through encounter with new events and experiences. When
we hear an idea or come to understand a concept in such a way
that the new is assimilated into our already existing core of
knowledge, we have the "aha!" experience. "Now I see what
you are getting at!" is often the response when we are trying to
make a point.
Many times one can listen to a sermon, to good advice, or to a
therapist's comments and have the feeling, "I understand that. It
makes sense. I see what you mean and I agree." Yet one can go
away without changing the pattern of behavior that contradicts
the wisdom and truth of what has been understood. 	No real
change and growth have occurred. But Firet emphasizes that
God's Word intends to effect change and growth, not merely to
produce new information or new concepts in the mind. This is
why the pastoral caregiver must go beyond the "hermeneutic
moment" to the "agogic moment."
While the concept of pedagogy is familiar to us, the word

-- 38 of 91 --

fflE 	COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	67
agogy is more recent and less familiar. Agogy, which basically
means "guidance," describes a situation in which a person is not
merely "addressed" 	or "talked at," but actually encountered 	in
such a way that there is "guidance from one kind of action to
another." 	Through the intermediary 	role of the counselor, an
"agogic moment" can occur. "It is a motive force which activates
the person on whom it is focused, so that that person begins to
change." 12 What 	I 	earlier 	called 	the 	integrative 	process 	of
growth is close to what Firet means by the term "agogic." It is
growth produced in the self by the guidance (agogy) of another.
Firet 	warns 	against 	construing 	this 	kind 	of guidance 	as
"nurture," because nurture presupposes an "ideal type" toward
which the nurturer 	guides the person. As soon as a nurturing
guidance becomes intentional, the person may stop growing and
may wrongly depend 	on the nurturer as the actual power that
produces 	change. In contrast to nurture, 	the agogic situation
believes that the motive power for change lies within the client,
not in the counselor. The counselor merely mediates that power
and facilitates the growth process.
Let us define this process more fully. The "agogic situation,"
or growth process, is a human and personal encounter, whether
ordinary or extraordinary, that releases 	a motive power that
generates change. This change opens up the constricted world
of the one who lives only marginally. The constricted person
develops 	into a self-directed 	and fully functional 	participant 	in
community, and his or her narrow self is expanded to a larger
and more authentic existence. For example, in the case of Bill, a
counselor who is herself an integrated and growing person can
intervene into his "closed" self and become the agent of change
and growth for him. A counselor who understands the power of
grief to heal can guide Bill in the process of grieving his lost
physical prowess (the injured knee). She can release in him a
new motive power to intregrate this loss into his life and so
transform it from something alien to part of his "story." The
point at which this transformation occurs is what Firet means by
the "agogic moment."
Firet 	describes 	three 	components 	in the 	agogic situation.
First, a motive power comes into the situation in the form of a
word, address, or symbolic action; second, another person acts
as an intermediary for this motive power; and third an effect is
marked by change and growth.ta The Holy Spirit comes directly

-- 39 of 91 --

68 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
to persons as movement on the human spirit, suggests Firet. The
motive power that enters the agogic situation comes from God as
the source of human life itself. Yet persons recognize the effect
of growth and change in a new motivation that is truly their own.
We see an example in David's expressing in a psalm, "Put a
new and right spirit within me" 	(Ps. 51:10). Here 	David is
referring to his relationship with Bathsheba and the killing of
her husband. When the prophet Nathan confronts David about
these sins, he creates the "agogic situation" by telling a story of
a rich man who took the only sheep of a poor man to feed a
stranger. David says, "The man •.. 	deserves to die." Nathan
responds, "You are the man!" David acknowledges the truth: "I
have 	sinned." 	Nathan 	then 	gives 	the 	final word 	of grace,
indicating that change and growth have occurred: "You shall not
die" 	(2 Sam. 	12:13). All 	three 	components 	of 	the 	agogic
situation are present. A motive power released in David allows
him to integrate his own terrible deed and accept God's grace
and forgiveness; Nathan acts as an intermediary, having earned
the right to confront David in this way; and Psalm 51 testifies to
the effect produced 	in David's life.
How do we recognize that an agogic moment or situation has
occurred? Because the agogic moment affects the life, attitude,
and behavior of the person, we can only recognize the moment
after it has occurred. A client may come to a therapy session and
say, "I could hardly wait to get here to tell you this. I woke up
this morning and something was different. The feeling of that
awful burden that I had been carrying was simply gone. I can't
explain it, but I feel different." The counselor herself may not
be aware of any precise moment in the previous sessions when a
breakthrough occurred. There were, to be sure, times when the
client seemed to gain new insight and when the therapeutic
interpretation 	seemed accurate. But these were only "herme-
neutic 	moments" 	with no immediate 	relief or change. 	Still,
therapeutic insight and interpretation are valuable contributions
to the therapeutic process. The agogic moment ordinarily does
not happen without such insight.
In contrast to therapeutic insight, the agogic moment actually
releases motive power to begin change and growth. The agogic
moment requires above all an encounter between the "growth
promoter" and the client that is fully human on both sides.
There must be real parity between the one who hears and the

-- 40 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	69
one who speaks, between 	the one who counsels and the one
who is counseled. This encounter is what Firet calls the "pre-
agogic" situation; it means that "all action toward a human
being with a view to his or her humanization has its starting
point in dealing with a particular person as a human being."14
Although the 	counseling 	relationship 	clearly differentiates
between 	the 	therapist 	and 	client, 	the 	therapist 	(or growth
promoter) must overcome this disparity and create an environ-
ment for the agogic situation. Says Firet, "The growth promoter
who does not enter the relationship as equal, does not enter the
relationship: he not only does not come close to the other; he
cannot even maintain distance; he is simply not there."is The
concepts of "being there" and "distance" suggest a therapeutic
relation 	in 	which 	both 	the 	speaker 	and 	hearer, 	both 	the
counselor and the counselee, are mutually defined through the
encounter at the core level of human selfhood. This is more than
a therapeutic 	strategy to gain confidence. 	It is an essential
component of the process that produces growth and change as a
therapeutic 	outcome.
Let us review what we have said about the motive power for
growth:
• 	Resistance 	to change must be overcome by releasing 	a
motive power from within the self;
• 	The motive power to change lies within the self in the form
of "spirit" or "soul"; in this "center" the self thinks, wills,
and feels;
• 	The self is inner-driven, not stimulus-response controlled;
• 	The 	motive 	power 	of the 	self is released 	through 	the
encounter 	and guidance of another as agent of change;
• 	This 	encounter, 	called 	the 	"agogic moment," 	produces
change by
-releasing 	motive power within the self,
-relying 	on the guidance of another person,
-producing 	an actual effect of growth in the person.
The Counselor as the Human Equation in Therapy
Our focus in this 	chapter 	is on the 	counselor 	as growth
promoter. Our thesis is that an effective therapeutic intervention
is one in which the client's motive power to grow is facilitated

-- 41 of 91 --

70 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
by the counselor's perceived presence as a partner in the growth
process. We have looked at the process of growth and change
using Firet' s terminology of the agogic moment. Instead of using
this technical term, I will simply call it the "growth process." I
will continue 	to assume that the threefold 	process of growth
includes a release of motive power, the role of the counselor as
intermediary, and a perceived effect of change and growth in the
counselee.
The people who face each other in the counseling room have
names. They have personal histories. They are somehow always
vulnerable. 	They can be offended and hurt. Or they can be
respected 	and granted the benefit of the doubt as mysterious
beings, 	not capable 	of being 	resolved 	into a problem 	or a
profession. They all have feelings as well as faces. They all have
hopes 	and dreams 	as well as failings and fears. All of this,
though it be unspoken, constantly attends the encounter of the
counselor and the client and cries out that this relationship, too,
despite the urgency of divine address or the misery of human
need and weakness, demands that this humanity be recognized,
affirmed, and cared for.
This could be mere rhetoric and sentimentality if it were not
also fundamentally true and if the issues at stake were not so
crucial.
The Swiss psychiatrist Paul Toumier 	is well known for his
therapeutic 	distinction between 	"person" 	and "personage," 	as
well as his emphasis on the humanity of the therapist. He urges
us to bring the "personage into harmony with the person," not
by looking inward "where the true nature of the person always
eludes us," but by turning outward "towards the world, towards
our neighbor, towards God." The "personage" 	is what others
experience 	through our actions and presence; 	the "person" 	is
who we actually are. This inner "person," Toumier says, is the
real person who must be disclosed in order to overcome the
personage.
Toumier found through his own therapeutic 	experience that
"confession" on the part of the therapist often lessens a client's
resistance to growth. He tells of a case in which he counseled a
woman for weeks without progress. She had been referred to
him by a colleague. In a time of prayer, Toumier discovered that
he had been overconcemed 	with "being too much successful"
in the eyes of his colleague. He shared this insight with his

-- 42 of 91 --

THE COUNSELORAS GROWI'HPROMOTER 	71
patient 	and 	discovered 	that 	the 	atmosphere 	between 	them
improved 	considerably. 16 This 	is an example 	of what 	Firet
means 	by 	"parity" 	between 	the 	counselor 	and 	counselee.
Humanization must occur for there to be actual growth, and it
occurs most effectively when the counselor engages the other as
the person 	she or he is.
When 	we considered 	the 	anthropological 	basis for growth
earlier 	in this chapter, 	we reproduced 	the core paradigm of
personhood as developed in :figure 3. From this perspective we
defined 	growth as integrative, 	relational, 	and being 	open to
change. This provides a more substantive basis for understand-
ing what growth toward health means. Growth is not merely
change, 	but 	the 	enhancement 	and 	enlargement 	of the 	self
through integration. Change in behavior does not always mean
change and growth at the integrative 	level.
Referring again to :figure 3, we note that the construct of the
self as related 	to the 	other constitutes 	core humanity 	itsel£
Therapeutic 	intervention 	into the 	core humanity 	of another
therefore requires that an approach be made "humanly" and not
merely 	"technically" 	or "professionally." 	The 	technical 	and
professional training and skills that the counselor must bring to
the therapy session can also be introduced through his or her
own presence 	in the encounter 	as a person.
This does not violate the integrity or freedom of the counse-
lee's 	"self," 	because 	the freedom and growth of the self are
oriented toward the other person. That is to say, growth is not
only integrative with respect to the selfs congruence with itself
in each of the levels of personhood, but it is also growth through
relatedness 	to other selves. In fact, as Firet 	correctly states,
change and growth only occur when this encounter takes place
as part of the "agogic moment." For such a relationship to be
effective, says Firet, a person must tum to another in trust to let
her participate in the process of her own change and growth. A
relationship can only produce this growth when mutual trust is
engendered. 	In this encounter 	there 	must be a presence 	of
"authority," 	not 	in 	the 	sense 	of a 	hierarchy 	of psychical,
physical, technical, or even spiritual expertise, but in the sense
of actually being an auctor, a "promoter of the prosperity" of a
life in the process of becoming.11
By restating our basic thesis for this chapter, we can empha-
size this point more clearly: an effective therapeutic interoen-

-- 43 of 91 --

72 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
tion is one in which 	the 	client•s motive 	power to grow is
facilitated by the counselor•s perceived presence as a partner in
the 	growth 	process. The 	effectiveness 	lies 	in 	the 	client's
perceiving the counselor as a growth partner.
Even as the knife of a surgeon can cut but cannot heal, the
psychic scalpel of the therapist 	can expose an atrophied 	and
deformed human spirit, but cannot implant the power to trust,
love, and act in faith. Most of us learn to trust and love and come
to faith without extraordinary means of intervention. We sup-
pose that we have a certain autonomy of selfhood because we
have not had to surrender to the care of a professional therapist.
But this is self-deception. From the beginning, we have had the
personal space of our lives invaded by "growth promoters"! Yet
we did not mind. We responded openly and freely to those who
became partners in our own growth and development. But what
we experienced ordinarily and somewhat routinely is the same
thing that some of us need in a special and extraordinary sense
when the process of growth and change stops. It is when we
become stuck that we need the intervention of a skilled "growth
promoter."
In these therapeutic situations, the "growth process" (agogic
moment) begins with encounter in which the counselor medi-
ates the "power that motivates growth" directly and discerning-
ly. The counselor's therapeutic 	skill provides the discernment
and precision to mediate the power accurately. Hence we can
appreciate 	the 	value of intensive 	training 	as a psychologist,
therapist, 	or pastoral counselor. These 	people 	need 	all their
skills and knowledge in their ministry of mediating the motive
power that produces change and growth. This motive power is
love.
The role of the counselor as growth promoter can be summa-
rized as follows:
• 	Counselors are open to the real humanity of their counse-
lees, and this is perceived 	by the counselees;
• 	Counselors are present in the counseling situation so as to
reveal their own humanity;
• 	The core humanity of each person is structurally open to
the 	other; 	thus 	the 	counselor 	does 	not 	"invade" 	the
counselee 	but is present 	as a growth partner.

-- 44 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	73
The Motive Power of Love
The power that motivates persons can be indiscriminate and
even destructive. In its most positive sense this power may be
viewed as a "self-actualizing" potential in which the drive to
move through basic human needs to higher needs is considered
the motivating force in therapy (e.g., Abraham Maslow). In more
Freudian terms, this power may be viewed as blind libidinous
instinct or craving that needs to be connected to positive and
healthy 	ego 	needs 	through 	analysis 	and 	transference 	(e.g.,
Melanie Klein). Or, it may be viewed in a more mystical sense
as a kind of "daimonic" impulse or drive, which can be either
destructive or creative (e.g., Rollo May). In behavioristic psy-
chology, power is not an attribute of the self, but a phenomenon
of stimulus-response mechanism. The power to produce change
lies almost totally with the stimulus (e.g., B. F. Skinner).
All these concepts of power as a therapeutic resow:ce tend to
be individualistic 	and phenomenological. 	That is, they seek
sources for altering a person's behavior within the personality
itself or, in the case of behaviorism, totally outside the personal-
ity.
In the 	anthropological 	model we are using, power is not
simply a person's need, craving, or search for creativity. Nor is
power totally outside 	the person. The power 	of selfhood is
"response 	power." 	The 	image 	of God as a divine 	endowment
posits a power of "response-in-kind" as the essential motivation
of persons. In the biblical story of creation, Adam, the solitary
male, is "powerless" 	to change and grow even though he has
"control" over his environment, can name the animals, and hear
God's commands and obey them. What is lacking is what I call
"response-in-kind" 	power. The 	biblical 	text says that Adam
lacked a "partner" or "helper," or "one corresponding to him,"
as the Hebrew word literally says (Gen. 2:18). With the creating
and positioning 	of the other person as one whom he could
encounter directly, Adam became "empowered" to respond out
of the depth of himself to one who had the power to encounter
him as such. This response-in-kind 	empowerment 	links the
motivating power of the self as the source of change and growth
to human encounter 	and relationship.
Whereas 	God's 	address 	and 	command 	to 	Adam did 	not
empower him in this way, the encounter with the other human

-- 45 of 91 --

74 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
did. This, of course, is precisely what the creation story means to
tell us. God and human personhood are as unalike as they are
alike. The divine image does not lie solely between God and an
individual human, but also in the relationship of persons. The
quality of this relationship 	is indeed 	grounded in the motive
power of God's own love-this 	is what the image of God means
to convey as a material gift of human empowerment. 	In the
human encounter of one with the other, the core motivation of
the self to love is released 	as response-in-kind.
We now have the answer to Roszak's charge that the person-
hood of one is violated by the 	intervention 	of another. The
problem is not an ethical one, as Roszak seems to assume, but an
anthropological one. If people are structurally open to the other
as necessary to the growth and integration of the self, then love
that seeks the other's growth and health is not an invasion, but a
prompter. Christians who counsel from this perspective 	make
interventions humanly, not merely professionally. This is all the
more important to remember for those who have spiritual and
pastoral motivations in counseling.
Love is a motivating power only for God and for those who
bear his image. "We love," says the apostle, "because he first
loved us" 	(1 John 4:19). We are urged to love one another
because "love is of God, and he who loves is born of God and
knows God" (4:7). Also, "if we love one another, God abides in
us and his love is perfected 	in us" (4:12).
Clearly, such love as a motivating power for growth is more
than an affection or an "attitude." All human expressions of love
should seek growth, in oneself and in the other. This requires
the "real presence" 	of the other, in both word and deed. The
person who releases love as the motive power is open to change,
which means open to the Spirit of God as the source of renewal,
growth, and change. A counselor who is cautious and closed to
this spiritual openness as a dynamic of the therapeutic encoun-
ter has already sacrificed the greater possibility of empower-
ment for growth to the lesser goal of therapeutic 	efliciency. 18
When Jesus commissioned his disciples to minister the reality
of the 	kingdom 	of God, he 	sent 	them 	out without 	title 	or
professional status. He sent them out in the same form in which
he himself was present in the world-becoming 	human for the
sake of the salvation of humans. "Whenever you enter a town
and they receive you, eat what is set before you; heal the sick in

-- 46 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	75
it and say to them, 'The kingdom of God has come near to you' "
(Luke 10:9; c£ also Luke 17:21; Matt. 10:7).19
Summary
In this chapter we have argued the thesis that an effective
therapeutic 	intervention 	is one in which the client's 	motive
power 	to 	grow is 	facilitated 	by 	the 	counselor's 	perceived
presence 	as a partner in the growth process.
• 	We defined growth as integrative, relational, and openness
to change;
• 	We examined the concept of the agogic moment as the
release of the motive power to change;
• 	We sought to understand 	the role of the counselor as a
partner in the growth process;
• 	We discovered that God's love seeks its fulfillment in the
human task of growth and that this saving and sanctifying
love is released through the reciprocal love experienced
between 	the counselor and the client in the therapeutic
encounter.
This love is not treason or treachery committed against the
human self. It liberates, empowers, and enriches personal life.
Christians who counsel are sent with this gracious permission
and 	commission. 	It is indeed 	a high 	calling.
Notes
1. Theodore Roszak, Person/Planet (Garden City, N.Y.: Double-
day/Anchor, 1979), 139.
2. 	Michael 	Balint, 	The 	Doctor, 	His 	Patient 	and 	the 	Illness
(Marshfield, Md.: Pitman, 1957),5: cited by Roger Hurding, The Tree of
Healing (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1988), 188.
3. Cited by Hurtling, The Tree of Healing, 28-29.
4. Ibid.
5. Allen E. Bergen, "Psychotherapy and Religious Values," in
Wholeness and Holiness: Readings in the Psychology/Theology of
Mental Health, ed. H. Newton Malony (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983),
306£.
6. Carl Rogers, Counseling and Psychotherapy (Boston: Houghton
Miffiin, 1942), 29.
7. Howard Clinebell, Basic Types of Pastoral Care and Counseling
(London: SCM Press, 1984), 31-34. See also, "Growth Counseling," in

-- 47 of 91 --

76 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Helping People Grow, ed. Gary Collins (Ventura, Cali£: Vision House,
1980).
8. H. Newton Malony, ed., Wholeness and Holiness: Readings in the
Psychology/Theology of Mental Health (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983),
20-21.
9. Donald F. Tweedie, Jr., Logotherapy: An Evaluation ofFrankl's
Existential Approach to Psychotherapy (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1961),
35. For further reading in the concept oflogotherapy, see Viktor Frankl,
The Unconscious God: Psychotherapy and Theology (London: Hodder
and Stoughton, 1977); Man's Search for Meaning: An Introduction to
Logotherapy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1959); The Doctor and the Soul:
From Psychotherapy to Logotherapy (New York: Alfred A. Knopf:
1955).
10. Helmut Thielicke, Being Human .•• 	Becoming Human (New
York: Doubleday, 1984), 446.
11. Jacob Firet, Dynamics in Pastoring (Het agogisch Moment in het
pastoraal Optreden), trans. John Vriend (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1986), esp. 99ff.
12. Ibid., 101.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid., 161 (emphasis in original).
15. Ibid., 165 (emphasis in original).
16. Paul Toumier, The Meaning of Persons (London: SCM Press,
1957), 35-36: 	cited by Hurtling, The Tree of Healing, 330.
17. Firet, Dynamics in Pastoring, 112.
18. Charles Gerkin comments perceptively on the ..gap" between the
self and the 	other that must be 	interpreted 	positively from the
perspective of object relations theory when he says: "Thus a gap is
formed between the self and the mother as well as the self and God,
and this gap must be interpreted. This interpretation comprises the task
of the life of the soul as seen theologically as it comprises the task of the
self as we have seen it from the psychological perspective of object
relations theory. But, as in the analogous relationship with the earthly
mother, this task of sustaining the life of the self or soul is not simply an
autonomous activity. Rather the life of the soul is facilitated by God,
who both asserts otherness and mirrors the deepest longings of the
human spirit" (The Living Human Document [Nashville: Abingdon,
1984], 95).
19. The Roman Catholic theologian Hans Urs von Balthasar ex-
presses the case for salvation as present 	healing in the midst of
continuing imperfection when he says, "Thus man, healed and made
whole in the salvation of God, and thus in this simple basic sense holy,
rests in a mysterious suspension he does not himself understand and
which on that very account is strangely exhilarating. He is clearly aware

-- 48 of 91 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	77
of earthly 	imperfectibility, 	which 	does 	not 	become 	for him 	the
oppressive prison. The thought of having to perfect himself at any cost
does not become an obsession. Knowing of the house built up in grace
for him with God, he can cheerfully inhabit his tumbledown hut and
free himself through time" (A Theological Anthropology 	[New York:
Sheed and Ward, 1967), 101).
This may be one way of expressing the relation of wholeness to
holiness, but one should also be careful not to let it become permission
to leave persons in untherapeutic 	environments with only spiritual
assurances as a form of comfort. This would be to give a stone when a
child asks for bread!

-- 49 of 91 --



-- 50 of 91 --

PART TWO
SPIRITUAL 	DYNAMICS
IN COUNSELING

-- 51 of 91 --



-- 52 of 91 --

4
The Kingdom of God as
Therapeutic 	Context
As we turn our focus to spiritual dynamics in counseling, we
need 	to 	clarify 	the 	context 	and 	culture 	that 	bear 	on 	the
therapeutic interventions 	made by Christian psychologists and
therapists. What we have called the "growth process" (agogic
moment) involves a process of change and development of the
client in a therapeutic 	relationship. 	There 	is an "ecological"
dimension to the self that involves relationship to others as well
as to God. This necessarily entails a social and cultural context
in which the change takes place.
S. L. Halleck 	writes 	in The Politics of Therapy, "There 	is no
way in which the psychiatrist can deal with behavior that is
partly generated by a social system without either strengthening
or altering that system. Every encounter 	with a psychiatrist,
therefore, has political implications." 1
This was certainly true for Jesus! The religious authorities
condemned 	his healing of the man blind from birth (John 9)
because it occurred on the Sabbath. Jesus' healing challenged a
social and religious system that tolerated the sick and deformed
to preserve 	its institutional 	life. On one occasion, when con-
fronted with a man having a paralyzed arm, Jesus challenged the
authorities with a question: "Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do
good or to do harm?" (Mark 3:4). When they did not reply, he
immediately healed the man. This healing directly challenged
the prevailing 	ethical and religious culture 	of Jesus' 	society.
Often 	he 	explicitly 	commanded 	those 	healed 	from mental
illness to return 	to their 	homes and communities 	and there
81

-- 53 of 91 --

82 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
testify of their healing as a sign that the kingdom of God had
manifested 	its power 	(Mark 5:19).
Therapeutic 	gains do not occur in a cultural or social vacuum.
Christians 	who counsel 	are keenly aware of this-too 	keenly
aware, in many cases, for their own comfort. They realize that
they cannot 	intervene 	therapeutically 	without 	a· conscious 	or
unconscious intention to help the client adapt to his or her own
cultural context. The very fact that a person seeks therapy or is
urged by others to seek help indicates some degree of cultural
and social maladaptation. "Implicit 	in every therapy is a theory
of culture," 	suggests Alvin Dueck.2
From a Christian perspective, 	the issue of a cultural theory
with regard to therapeutic 	goals becomes 	critical. The 	coun-
selor's attempts 	to extend therapeutic 	gain to include 	growth
toward specific personal and religious values and goals could be
viewed as inappropriate 	or even "unethical" 	from the perspec-
tive of secular culture.
The social and cultural context that the client brings to the
growth process will affect the process in at least two ways. First,
any growth or change in the client will require integration back
into the culture 	and context from which the client is coming.
This often involves therapeutically 	redefining one's identity and
relationship 	to that culture. But failure to make this integrative
movement will leave the client alienated 	from the only culture
he or she knows.
Second, the culture that the therapist brings to the situation
will affect the 	growth process 	in some way. The 	long-range
"growth goals" as negotiated 	between 	the therapist 	and client
may require 	modifying the culture 	of either 	the client 	or the
therapist. When the culture of the Christian counselor includes
values and goals assumed to be essential to human health and
wholeness 	as theologically 	defined, there may be a confronta-
tion 	of cultures 	in 	working 	out 	the 	therapeutic 	goals. The
counselor will have to determine how far these growth goals can
be 	made 	part 	of the 	therapeutic 	goals without 	making 	this
confrontation disruptive 	and nontherapeutic. 	Even Jesus could
not 	do 	more 	for some 	people 	than 	to provide 	mental 	and
physical healing. Beyond that he urged the transformation of the
culture 	itself to provide 	a context for growth (as seen in the
Sermon on the Mount, Matt. 5- 7).
When 	a Christian 	counselor 	has a client 	who 	is suffering

-- 54 of 91 --

fflE 	KINGDOM OF GOD AS mERAPEUTIC 	CONTEXT 	83
mental and emotional abuse in a marriage relationship and the
other partner in the marriage will not respond to therapeutic
intervention, a separation or even divorce may result. Counsel-
ing an alcoholic to sobriety will greatly affect the client's marital
or family relationship. If a codependerit is involved, that person,
unable to sustain a relationship with a recovering alcoholic, may
leave. The counselor's own values and cultural framework will
be influenced as well. Therapeutic gains are social and cultural
realities that affect both counselor and counselee. For Christians
who counsel, the biblical theme of the kingdom of God provides
a therapeutic 	context in which to consider these factors.
In this section we are shifting the focus from therapy as a
process of integrative growth to the environment of therapeutic
gain. This environment is, in fact, the culture in which both the
therapist and the client exist. The culture is the particular ethos,
worldview, 	values, 	and 	common 	language-among 	other
things-that 	make up the context of individuals.
Christians describe this culture 	as the kingdom of God, a
theme that runs throughout Scripture. We will look first at the
culture of the kingdom of God with respect to counseling goals,
and then at three specific themes of the kingdom: righteousness,
wisdom, and community.
The Kingdom of God and Counseling Goals
The concept of the kingdom of God is central to the Judeo-
Christian tradition. The kingdom is a social reality over which
and through 	which 	God exercises his power and presence,
rather than merely a realm over which he reigns. God promised
a land, but he established a people before he gave them a land.
The kingdom of God is a culture that takes form in world
culture. That is to say, there is a culture unique to a society and
people whose personal, social, and religious life is oriented to
this particular God who makes covenant with them. But this
kingdom culture 	only exists as a particular 	form of "world
culture." The cultural matrix of the Semitic people, descended
from Shem, a son of Noah, became the world culture in which
the kingdom culture took form.
However, 	no essential 	language, race, sexual role, ethnic
origin, or worldview belongs to the culture of the kingdom of
God. This was not made clear in the Old Testament, although it

-- 55 of 91 --

84 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
was implicit in the original covenant promise to Abraham- 	"By
you all the families of the earth shall bless themselves" 	(Gen.
12:3)-and 	was quite explicit in the prophecy of Joel- 	"I will
pour out my spirit on all flesh; your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy 	... " (Joel 2:28).
The relativity of all world cultures became clear through the
incarnation, 	death, 	and 	resurrection 	of Jesus 	of 	Nazareth.
Though Jesus was born a male Jew and was socialized into the
Palestinian culture of the first century, his resurrection and the
sending of his Spirit fulfilled the prophecy of Joel and broke
down the 	wall of cultural 	particularity 	as a criterion 	of the
kingdom of God (cf. Eph. 2:14-22; 	Gal. 3:26-29).
Let me repeat the point: The kingdom of God is a culture with
its own social and religious life that takes form in existing world
cultures. 	This 	culture 	of the 	kingdom uses 	existing cultural
forms and corrects and adapts these forms to the content and
reality of the kingdom of God. The kingdom of God understood
in this way has a therapeutic 	aim that seeks the health 	and
wholeness of individuals in the context of the community that
provides their core identity. God enters into the personal, social,
and historical life of people in order to release a motive power
for wholeness 	(shalom), righteousness, 	faith, and love of God
and neighbor. This is what we have called the growth process.
This is a critical insight for Christians who counsel. It means
especially that the context of each person's life is not alien to the
culture 	of the 	kingdom of God. People 	can be accepted 	as
persons in the social context in which they live. This means that
Christian counselors can authentically relate to non-Christians
at 	this 	level. 	The 	kingdom 	of God 	does 	not 	discriminate
between those who believe in God and those who do not, but
treats each person as someone created in the divine image and
as an object of God's love and care. This also means, however,
that the kingdom of God works from within the existing social
and 	cultural 	matrix of each 	person 	to bring 	liberation 	and
healing, especially in the forms inflicted by that person's own
social setting. The kingdom of God is not primarily a religious
culture, but a power that liberates and frees persons within their
existing culture to experience the "human" culture that belongs
by right of God's creation to each person.
No 	longer 	are 	individuals 	oppressed 	by 	impersonal 	and
tyrannical world powers; they are liberated (as in the Exodus) to

-- 56 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	85
become a new people whose social relationships become the
source of personal identity and power becomes transformed into
covenant love.
No longer are people 	subject to the blind 	and capricious
powers of nature; they are aligned with the power of a creator
God who intervenes into these natural forces and sustains the
fragile life of his own people.
No longer are people possessed by powers and spirits that
defile and destroy; they are filled and directed by the good and
holy Spirit of God.
No longer do moral failure, outbreak of cruelty, and break-
down of family leave hopeless victims and unmediated 	guilt;
the same God who demands holiness in life and action provides
atonement, healing, and restoration through rituals of forgive-
ness and renewal.
With God incarnated through Jesus of Nazareth, this culture of
the kingdom became a living power and presence through his
person and ministry. Through the calling of the twelve disci-
ples, Jesus reconstitutes 	the kingdom community and culture.
He delivers the ethical mandate of the kingdom as the Sermon
on the Mount and invites everyone, without discrimination, to
enter the kingdom. The conflict occurs between the culture of
the kingdom and the prevailing culture of religious Judaism,
where the concerns for justice, forgiveness, righteousness, and
healing have been 	forgotten.
Jesus did not specialize in individual 	therapy as a clinical
procedure-though 	he did not tum away from offering such
help. 	His concern 	was for the 	growth goals that belong 	to
persons 	as created 	in the 	divine 	image. 	He 	called 	for the
integration 	of the entire 	self and pointed to the healing and
purifying power of the inner life directed outward toward others
and toward God. He demanded the integration of religious truth
with social concern. He sought the integration of prayer with
feeding 	the 	hungry 	and 	healing 	the 	sick. He 	enacted 	the
integration of social unity over the barriers of racial, sexual, and
religious discrimination.
Jesus left no person standing in the spot where they were
healed, but either sent them back to be integrated with their
own people again, as a sign of the kingdom of God, or called
them as followers into the new community of the kingdom.
This understanding 	of the kingdom provides 	a context for

-- 57 of 91 --

86 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
developing an approach to therapy from a Christian perspective.
The kingdom of God is a therapeutic context that offers, as Jesus
claimed, "the 	way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6).
• 	This way is the way of wisdom, which leads to the good and
fulfilled life;
• 	This truth is the truth of righteousness, which gives moral
worth and value to life;
• 	This life relates the individual 	to the community 	of faith
and hope, a community extending beyond, yet including,
this present 	existence with its suffering and sorrow.
These three 	"ways," constituting 	the heart of the Christian
life and grounded in Jesus himself, give us a threefold paradigm
to explore further 	the 	culture 	of the 	kingdom 	of God with
respect to counseling 	goals.
The Way of Wisdom: A Discerning Praxis
If people who seek help from counselors could express in one
word what they would like, beyond relief from pain or depres-
sion, it probably would be wisdom. They would be quick to
point 	out 	that 	wisdom 	does 	not 	mean 	knowledge, 	though
knowledge 	helps. You may need 	knowledge 	to know how to
take the first step, but you need wisdom to know how to take the
second step before you take the first!
In the Old Testament, wisdom meant discovering and living
the kind of life that brought health, happiness, and fulfillment.
The book of Proverbs extols wisdom as fruitfulness, meaningful
work, moral sensibility, 	and security for body and soul.
The kingdom of God provides a context for discerning and
practicing wisdom. The wisdom of the kingdom is not abstract
and theoretical; it is practical and within reach of each person
through the right actions. "Wisdom," 	says Samuel Southard,
is reflection upon human possibilities and limitations in the light
of God's revelation. It is guided both by realistic observations of
ourselves and explanations of our attitudes and behaviors that are
drawn from revealed knowledge of God's original intentions for
his creation. The context for the wisdom of God is the power of his
love shown in understanding of the self and others-both 	friends
and strangers.a

-- 58 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	87
Here again, those who seek counseling will often lament their
inability to act and behave in ways that result in happiness and
well-being. 	They 	know better 	than 	most philosophers 	that
wisdom is discovered in the living of life, not in reflecting on it.
This discovery of the way of living is called praxis. Wisdom is a
discerning praxis, and as such it is one important aspect of the
culture of the kingdom of God.
The concept of praxis originates with Aristotle, who distin-
guished between two kinds of action. The first he called poiesis,
the act of making something that results in a product. The telos,
or final value or character of this activity, is not included in the
product. The second kind he called praxis. This kind of action
includes the telos intentionally in the action as an outcome and
also as a criterion for the quality of the action. In praxis, one not
only is guided in one's actions by the intention of realizing the
telos, but also discovers the telos through the action itself.4
We could illustrate this distinction in the construction of a
house. 	We measure 	the 	competence 	of the 	builder 	by the
technical specifications and quality of the house as a product of
professional craftsmanship. The end use of the house in terms of
the character of the people who use it (its telos), is not a factor
contained in its making. The builder would presumably devote
the 	same skill and diligence 	to constructing 	a brothel 	or a
church. The one who merely builds the house is not liable for its
final use or purpose (telos). The way of wisdom is discovered
through an authentic praxis in which God's purpose is more and
more realized in the living of life.
Praxis is not merely 	a "practice" 	in which 	one makes a
product or applies a theoretical knowledge; it means discerning
the truth as a final outcome of one's action. The action itself
contains its own good end, and if the end is not "good," the
action cannot be the right one. For example, when Jesus healed
on the Sabbath, he was acting in accordance with the telos of the
Sabbath, that is, God's purpose 	for the 	Sabbath in terms of
reconciliation and restoration of life to its God-intended value.
This 	was 	a 	form of praxis. 	The 	religious 	authorities 	who
challenged 	Jesus 	"practiced" 	the 	keeping 	of the 	law like a
blueprint, ignoring the telos of the law of the sabbath. This was
a form of poiesis, as Aristotle would say. This blind keeping of
the law concealed from the self-righteous Pharisees the true
purpose of the law. Even more serious, the action failed to yield

-- 59 of 91 --

88 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
the wisdom to see Jesus as the one in whom the work of God
was actually present.
The 	Old 	Testament 	emphasizes 	that 	God 	in 	his 	actions
intends good for his people. Likewise, the good life in word and
deed will lead the people to the goal of shalom, a concept of
peace and prosperity as a divine gift.
Jesus reiterated 	this concept of wisdom embodied 	in praxis
when he said, "You will know them by their fruits" (Matt. 7:16)
and "Why do you call me 'Lord, Lord,' and not do what I tell
you?" (Luke 6:46). He used the analogy of the good and the bad
tree to make his point: "For no good tree bears bad fruit, nor
again does a bad tree bear good fruit; for each tree is known by
its own fruit" (Luke 6:43-44).
The 	kingdom 	of God 	is 	revealed 	through 	a 	praxis 	that
embodies the telos, or maturity of a life through its actions. The
New Testament Greek word teleios (mature, perfect) was used
by those who translated 	the Old Testament 	into Greek (the
Septuagint) to render the Hebrew word salem (shalom), which
means "sound, complete, whole." The stress is on the concept of
being whole, perfect, or intact. It is used of the heart that is
wholly turned 	toward 	God (1 Kings 8:61; 	11:4) and 	of the
person who is wholly bound to God (Gen. 6:9; Deut. 	18:13).
Teleios is often used in the New Testament to mean "mature,
adult, fully developed" (1 Cor. 2:6; 14:20; Phil. 3:15). Paul uses
the word to say that he has not yet become fully "perfect" (Phil.
3: 12). But then 	he 	adds, 	"Let 	those 	of us who are mature
[teleios] be thus minded" 	(v. 15).
There 	is 	both 	an 	anthropological 	and 	an 	eschatological
concept 	of maturity 	or perfection. 	From the 	anthropological
perspective, 	maturity 	is not a process 	of ethical 	perfection
realized 	by degrees. 	Rather, maturity signifies the undivided
wholeness of a person in his or her behavior (cf. Matt. 19:21;
James 1:4). When applied 	to individuals, 	teleios, or maturity,
does not denote the qualitative end point of human endeavor,
but anticipates eschatological wholeness 	in actual living.
For example, a baby is "perfect" if it is healthy and growing,
even though it has not yet reached its "perfect" or "complete"
maturity. Through the praxis of living, the child not only will
grow, but through growth will actually discern and discover a
way ofliving. No person's wisdom can be given to another; each
must discover it through the praxis of living life itself.

-- 60 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	89
Jesus encouraged 	his disciples to "be perfect" even as the
heavenly 	Father 	is perfect 	(Matt. 5:48). In his high priestly
prayer Jesus asked that his followers be "perfected in unity" so
that the world might recognize the presence of Christ in their
lives (John 17:21). The concept of maturity, therefore, not only
must 	relate 	to 	an 	eschatological 	goal, but 	also 	must 	be 	a
Christological reality given in the present time through the gift
of the Holy Spirit 	The gift of the Holy Spirit is then 	itself
confirmed through a praxis of living whereby the fruit of the
Spirit-love, 	joy, peace, gentleness, goodness, etc.-are 	experi-
enced as part of what we have called growth goals.5
The "wisdom" discerned through praxis is not a maturity that
comes with age or experience alone, but is what I have earlier
called a growth process. It is a gift of discernment 	by which
one's life is secured and upheld from an ultimate source-God's
love and grace. This is a praxis of faith, by which one's attitudes,
emotions, and actions become ordered and integrated through
appropriation of this reality. This is to "know the truth" (John
8:32). It is to "walk in newness of life" (Rom. 6:4); to "walk by
the Spirit" (Gal. 5:16); to "walk in love" (Eph. 5:2); and to "walk
in the day" rather than in darkness (John 11:9).
The metaphor of walking carries exactly the meaning of praxis
as the discernment of wisdom. To "take up one's bed and walk"
(John 4:8) is not merely for the exercise, but to be integrated
back into life, to gain the "maturity" that belongs to those who
are 	fully functioning 	at the 	personal 	and 	social level. 	The
physical healing that enabled the paralyzed man to walk also
reintroduced him to his society and culture; he could no longer
"carry about" with him the old culture of being a cripple. In
carrying his own bed he now has a praxis of life where he will
discern the wisdom of life as his personal goal and purpose as
measured in terms of his social and communal life. The apostle
Paul suffered an apparently incurable physical problem that he
called his "thorn in the flesh." By his own testimony he says that
after praying three times for it to be removed, he came to the
understanding that this was to be a means of grace: "My grace is
sufficient for you." Therefore, concluded Paul, "my strength is
made perfect in weakness" 	(2 Cor. 12:9). This is the way of
wisdom by which one can gain the inner strength and coherence
of life to cope with what cannot be removed or changed.
Now, then, how does the kingdom of God act as a context for

-- 61 of 91 --

90 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
therapy? 	Surely we must 	see that therapy 	offers more than
psychological 	restoration. 	The 	goals 	of therapy 	go 	beyond
removing physical 	or emotional 	dysfunction. 	Integrating 	self
with self, with others, and with God is a praxis that discerns
meaning 	and purpose. 	The 	way of wisdom is the telos that
reaches back into the actions (praxis) of therapy to enable the
client to establish a coherent meaning to life. This itself can be
transforming, 	even 	when 	not every 	situation 	in life can be
transformed. There are losses that can only be grieved, includ-
ing a failed marriage, the loss of a child to raise because 	of
abortion, or damage done to others through one's carelessness.
The moral law supports the moral judgments 	in such cases.
But the moral law does not itself contain the moral freedom or
wisdom to provide healing and restoration. The kingdom of God
brings moral wisdom, not merely a relentless application of the
moral law. The church will often be tempted to think its primary
responsibility is to uphold the moral law of God and thus leave
those without moral virtue or standing exposed as victims or
failures. But if the church as the sign of the kingdom of God in
the world is to embody the moral wisdom of the kingdom, it will
need 	to offer restoration and renewal 	to those who have no
moral standing.
To say that "God hates divorce" (cf. Mal. 2:16) does not give
the Christian community the right to deny the grace of God to
those who have experienced this tragedy and failure of marriage
vows. The moral wisdom of God receives greater emphasis in
the Old Testament than his moral outrage! The story of Hosea
contains a powerful message of mercy and grace extended to a
people 	who 	have 	"committed 	adultery" 	with 	God 	as their
marriage partner, yet are the objects of God's love and renewal
in 	grace. The 	restoration 	of a person 	who 	has 	shattered 	a
marriage, aborted a fetus, or damaged another person's life has
high priority with God, for it is the restoration of his image in
humanity. The tension between 	upholding the divine order in
its perfection and upholding 	the divine intention 	in restoring
humanity is a praxis of moral wisdom. Christians who counsel
are agents of redemption 	when they function in this way.
Therapists who wish to bring a Christian perspective to bear
in the 	therapeutic 	process 	need 	to have 	this 	"maturity" 	or
wisdom that comes through praxis before they set themselves up
in "practice." So, too, the criteria to assess and measure effective

-- 62 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	91
therapy will consider the client's growth goals in terms of the
wisdom that belongs to those who experience the kingdom of
God.
The Gospels tell of a demon-possessed man who lived naked
among the tombs and bore the broken chains with which his
former neighbors had tried to control him. When Jesus healed
the man, he was found "sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and
in his right mind" (Luke 8:35). We marvel at the healing of this
man's emotional and mental condition. But who provided the
clothes? This man's clothing symbolized his reentry into the
community, his acceptance with trust and loving care, and his
newly discovered praxis of community. In the end, this "heal-
ing," marked by his clothing and acceptance into the commu-
nity, is as great a marvel as the healing of his tortured mind. In a
sense, this case is a parable of the culture of the kingdom of God
as a therapeutic context. Jesus could not have done it alone. And
the man was not "made 	perfect" 	until 	he was clothed 	and
restored to community.
This is the wisdom and the healing praxis by which one's life
is "made whole," which is a mark of the culture of the kingdom
of God. This is the way that Jesus offers as the discernment of
wisdom for life. We now look at the troth as a person's moral
horizon in the kingdom of God.
The Way of Righteousness: A Coherent Moral Vision
The biblical concept of truth is lodged in the larger concept of
righteousness. The righteousness of God is his acting "rightly"
so as to bring forth the truth as a result. We cannot be "in the
truth" unless we are rightly related to God and to our neighbor.
The opposite of truth is unrighteousness, which is a life devoted
to deception and deviousness. This is a basic theme in Paul's
letter to the Romans (especially chapters 3-6).
A life congruent with the truth of God's purpose as lived out
in praxis has a moral vision that is shared with the community
and culture 	with 	which 	one 	is identified. 	In 	the 	Christian
community 	and 	culture, 	moral 	vision 	and 	moral 	discourse
permeate 	all structures 	and relationships. 	Stanley Hauerwas
makes this point when he says:

-- 63 of 91 --

92 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
The church as a community of moral discourse gives meaning to its
ethical terms. To use such terms as freedom and equality as values
that are Christian and hence appropriate in a theory of government
or therapy neglects the fact that these terms have material content
in Jesus' definition of the Kingdom and as they are incarnated in
His life and death. Ethical terms are not self interpreting but
require a tradition to give them content.6
In the environment of the kingdom of God, personal goals are
thus subject to kingdom goals while, at the same time, kingdom
righteousness is exemplified in the integrity of social relation-
ships. While the kingdom is concerned with the inner righteous-
ness life of the individual person, it is even more concerned
with justice for the oppressed, fairness in trade and commerce,
regard for the poor and the 	"stranger 	within the gate," and
genuineness in approach to God through the worship and rituals
of community life.
The kingdom of God imposes a "coherent moral vision" on
the existing cultural and social structures, stressing righteous-
ness 	as 	an 	ethical 	link 	between 	persons 	and 	a 	religious
connection between the people and God. In the culture of the
kingdom of God, the moral and spiritual apostasy of one person
affects the righteousness of the community. This is seen in the
dramatic incident when Achan stole and hid some of the things
taken from the enemies in the victory over Jericho. His single
action caused the defeat of Joshua in the next military campaign,
and the writer says that in this situation, "the people of Israel
broke faith ..... 	Gosh. 7:1-26). 	In many other incidents, the
actions of a few resulted 	in the loss of righteousness 	for the
entire people.
The concept of a coherent moral vision, then, is not an abstract
set of moral principles. It is a moral vision of the social structure
of community in which individual 	lives are bound 	up in a
coherent and interconnected 	whole.
The righteousness 	of a single person 	is derived 	from the
righteousness of a people as a whole. However, this righteous-
ness is not the result of the perfecting of individual moral lives.
The righteousness of the people solely depends upon the grace
of God, who constitutes them as a people. The covenant, as the
binding metaphor of this relation between 	the Lord and the
people, is the basis for the moral vision of a people who "belong

-- 64 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	93
to Yahweh" and who are therefore 	a holy people 	because 	he
who called and constituted 	them as a people 	is holy.
This 	can be 	seen 	from another 	perspective 	as well. 	The
individual partakes of the righteousness 	of the community as a
privilege and gift. Circumcision sanctified a person symbolically
both 	by 	"cutting 	away the 	flesh" 	of natural 	origin 	and 	by
creating a new identity as a covenant person. The community,
not the 	individual 	act of penance, 	provided 	the 	source 	for
renewal of faith and the renewal of moral and spiritual integrity.
The community functioned 	both as administrator 	of justice
and mediator 	of mercy between 	God and the individual. 	No
private contrition or familial bond could sufficiently dissolve the
ethical 	relation 	of the 	individual 	to the 	community. 	Achan
repented 	of his wrongdoing, 	but the community 	nonetheless
stoned 	him to death 	for his sin. Parents 	might excuse their
children's 	rebellious acts, but they must nonetheless 	hand their
children 	over to the 	elders 	of the 	community 	for discipline
(Deut. 21:18-21).
Yet the community was also commanded to provide cities of
refuge for the "manslayer" to find protection against the avenger
(Num. 35). Righteousness is not only retribution for wrongdoing
to satisfy a sense of moral justice; it is an act of restoring lost
personhood. The community, as the source of a person's moral
dignity, provides that moral worth through concrete actions of
social inclusiveness.
In dealing with "outsiders" 	and those without any claim to
righteousness, 	Jesus himself provided 	a "circle of refuge" 	for
the sinner. To self-righteous critics who accused him of indis-
cretion, he said, "The tax collectors and the harlots go into the
kingdom of God before you" (Matt. 21:31; cf. also Luke 7:29-
30).
The 	one 	who 	mediates 	between 	the 	individual 	and 	the
community performs a "priestly" service, both as an advocate of
the individual who approaches the community for healing and
restoration, and as representative 	of the community as an "agent
of righteousness." 	This priestly service is closely linked to the
growth process, in which a motive power to experience change
and 	growth 	is 	released. 	As an 	intermediary, 	the 	one 	who
performs the priestly 	service shares a common humanity 	and
mediates 	the righteousness 	of grace and healing.

-- 65 of 91 --

94 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
For every high priest chosen from among men is appointed to act
on behalf of men in relation to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for
sin. He can deal gently with the ignorant and wayward, since he
himself is beset with weakness. Because of this he is bound to offer
sacrifice for his own sins as well as for those of the people. And one
does not take the honor upon himself, but he is called by God, just
as Aaron was (Heb. 5:1-4).
This person embodies the "moral horizon" that constitutes the
community of the kingdom of God. But the person does not
function primarily as an ethical agent, bound to ethical codes of
professional practice alone. This person is an agent of righteous-
ness. As a therapeutic gain, one may remove psychological guilt,
but to establish the person "in righteousness" places the person
in truth. That is, the gift of forgiveness and peace is affirmed by
one's belonging 	to and participating 	in the kingdom of God.
Such forgiveness goes beyond even contrition and confession,
which themselves are not sufficient to establish righteousness.
The 	righteousness 	of the 	kingdom 	of God 	is a 	social and
communal 	reality 	mediated 	through 	and 	by 	the 	one 	who
performs this priestly 	service.
Christians who counsel can also represent this culture of the
kingdom of God. They need to think of righteousness in terms of
a life that is given a "moral horizon" as a growth goal in addition
to the growth goals belonging to the process of therapy. The
wisdom that people seek when they come for counseling will
often be hidden to them, and perhaps to the counselor as well. A
skill 	even 	more 	important 	for 	the 	counselor 	than 	clinical
intuition is the discerning praxis of this wisdom that will orient
the client to a trajectory of health and growth extending beyond
specific therapeutic 	gains.
Didn't 	Jesus suggest that, with his authority and presence,
every Christian 	could act as an "agent 	of righteousness" 	(cf.
John 20:21-23; Acts 1:8)? The early church seemed to think so.
"But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation,
God's own people, that you may declare the wonderful deeds of
him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
Once you were no people but now you are God's people; once
you had not received mercy hut now you have received mercy"
(1 Peter 2:9-10). 	We will have more to say about this in the
final chapter of this book as we develop more fully the role of
the counselor as a form of pastoral care.

-- 66 of 91 --

THE ICINGOOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	95
Christian 	counselors 	should 	represent 	the 	coherent 	moral
vision 	embodied 	in 	a 	community 	that 	offers righteousness
beyond therapeutic 	gain. Such counselors provide the growth
goal 	of 	righteousness 	through 	authentic 	forgiveness 	and
affirmation by a community representing 	the kingdom of God.
Does this mean that a Christian therapist must in every case
provide therapy through the institutional form of the Christian
community-say 	a local church setting? Not necessarily. In the
parable of the good Samaritan, the Samaritan became the agent
of righteousness, 	not the priest or the Levite, both of whom
represented 	the institutionalized 	religious community.
It does mean, however, that the concept of "private practice"
will be radically qualified for the Christian therapist, because
the mediation of righteousness requires a living community as a
context in which the therapist lives and to which the therapist is
accountable. It also means that, to lead the client past therapeu-
tic gain, the counselor must establish on the trajectory of growth
the goal of righteousness as embodied affirmation of belonging.
There 	can be no definitive model for the way a Christian
therapist serves in a professional capacity. Many work on the
staff of mental health or psychological clinics where the services
are offered to the public without a context of community or
church support. In these cases, individual therapists will have to
think out for themselves what it means to provide this service as
a Christian, 	taking 	into account 	growth goals beyond 	mere
therapeutic 	gain. The role of the Christian as a professional
counselor will be discussed 	at greater length in chapter 	10.
Kirk Farnsworth, who offers a concept of "embodied integra-
tion" based on an incarnational model, suggests that one of the
best strategies for bringing our counseling practice under the
lordship of Christ is to establish a group of believers to whom
we are professionally accountable. This would provide a Chris-
tian forum for discussion, prayer, and shared concerns and also
place the counselor in a context and culture that extends the
Christian community.7 But what about the growth goals of the
client? The counselor may try to provide this linkage for the
client if it does not already exist. Who will "clothe" the client
when 	therapy 	comes 	to 	an 	end? 	Just 	as 	important 	is 	the
question, what community will provide the "moral horizon" of
health (righteousness) for the client during therapy?
These questions have no easy answers. The Christian who

-- 67 of 91 --

96 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
counsels, 	however, 	cannot 	define 	therapy 	so narrowly 	as to
ignore 	the 	culture 	of the 	kingdom 	of God as a context 	for
therapy. The concept of "private practice" will also need to be
reexamined when viewed from this perspective. 	If we use the
adjective "Christian," 	we must recognize it as a verb of action
that includes 	a praxis of community 	life.
The implications of what we are saying here also apply to the
church. 	A Christian 	community 	that 	is 	not 	providing 	this
"priestly" 	service of therapy 	"on the streets," 	so to speak, is
failing to be neighbor to those who are in need. In the culture of
the 	kingdom 	of God, 	the 	community 	cannot 	itself 	sustain
righteousness 	without 	being also the "good Samaritan."
We are tracing out the implications of the kingdom of God as a
culture 	that provides 	a context for therapy 	from a Christian
perspective. 	Using the formula statement of Jesus-"I 	am the
way, the truth, and the life" -we 	are developing 	a context for
therapy that includes wisdom, righteousness, 	and now commu-
nity. This community of the kingdom fulfills the individual's
quest for identity, 	meaning, 	and hope.
The Way of the Community: 	An Embodied 	Identity
The emergence 	of "identity" 	psychologies 	in the early and
middle 	part of this century 	was as much 	a response 	to the
growing 	emphasis 	on the 	individual 	self and 	the 	thirst 	for
experience as it was a weariness with the earlier naturalistic and
biological 	attempts 	to explain 	human 	behavior. 	Behavior no
longer preoccupied 	the therapists, but rather the phenomenon
of the 	person 	as an 	experiencing 	self.8 The 	humanist 	and
existential psychologists found a ready market for a variety of
new 	therapies 	in 	contemporary 	Western 	society 	where 	the
older, more traditional ties of community identity were broken
or rejected 	outright. The quest for "reality" 	even provoked a
"reality 	therapy" 	(William Glasser).
Alvin Dueck suggests that naming reality is the central task of
any healer. When the search for reality at the experiential level
moves the self inward 	rather than outward, the person 	loses
reality. In our ecological model of personhood 	(chap. 2) it was
argued 	that 	people 	operate 	in 	a 	three-sphere 	matrix: 	the
physical, the social, and the spiritual. The self (psyche/soul) is
totally present in each of the three spheres, but the "reality" 	of

-- 68 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	97
the self is experienced 	as a praxis of intentionality, 	belonging,
and identity 	that includes 	all three. 	This is what "embodied
identity" 	means. The 	embodiment 	is not only in one's 	own
physical 	body, 	but 	in 	the 	"body" 	of the 	community 	as 	a
corporate identity 	from which self identity 	is derived 	and on
which it is always somewhat dependent.
For example, the identity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob-the
founders of the new "family" and community of the kingdom of
God-was 	given embodiment through the covenant promise of
God. The ritual of circumcision was one form of creating a new
identity. The new identity, of course, was actually the naming of
reality by which the individual was integrated into the tradition
of the community as being in continuity with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. It is interesting 	to see that this ritual affected the
identity 	of the self (psyche/soul) 	at three 	levels. Identity 	was
literally "cut into the flesh" through circumcision, which was
both a ritual of incorporation into the family and community and
a sign and seal of the spiritual reality of covenant promise by
which one became a member of the kingdom of God. Circumci-
sion, like the Christian ritual of baptism, is not performed on
oneself; it is performed by significant others who represent the
community or "body" 	that gives the person primary identity.
The community that represents the culture of the kingdom of
God names this reality through the story, in which the tradition
is carried forward through its living members. Personal identity
is thus derived 	from the community identity of a people who
have as their essential being a history of community with God.
This identity is firmly grounded 	in this particular history of a
people of God. This is one reason why the concept of history is
so important 	for the Hebrew 	people.
Losing this community identity and participation 	in a living
history will result in a sense of anomie or disassociation for the
individual. The person may move from finding his or her reality
in community to finding it in the reality of the inner life. Brooks
Holifield 	suggests 	that 	this 	tendency 	can 	be 	found 	in 	the
development 	of a distinct emphasis in pastoral counseling over
the past several centuries 	in North America.
The story proceeds from an ideal of self-denial to one of self-love
to self-culture, from self-culture to self-mastery, from self-mastery
to self-realization within a trustworthy culture, and finally to a later

-- 69 of 91 --

98 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
form of self-realization counterpoised against cultural mores and
social institutions.a
Holifield 	also suggests 	that the 	contemporary 	preoccupation
with psychology might be traced to the influence of experiential
piety in religion.
The German theologian Wolfhart Pannenberg 	has analyzed
the effect of "penitential 	piety" as related to the loss of a sense
of community identity in Western society. He points out that the
Protestant tradition has emphasized attaining an individualistic
spirituality based on a sense of deep personal guilt over sin and
suggests that a better model for spirituality would be celebration
of one's life in community. This he calls "eucharistic piety."10
There 	is indeed 	some suspicion that modem 	culture• s ten-
dency 	toward 	self-realization 	owes something 	to a religious
inwardness that has become separated from the righteousness of
the kingdom of God. The culture 	of the kingdom demands a
righteous 	concern 	for the 	"fatherless," 	that 	is, those 	whose
identity 	as members 	of the 	community 	is threatened. 	This
righteousness integrates marginal persons into the "mature" life
of the community; it does not segregate them through discrimi-
natory practices or institutional 	dormitories.
"Our believing is conditioned at its source by our belonging,"
writes Michael Polanyi.11Therapeutic gains that do not establish
or reinforce a trajectory of growth in terms of participating 	in
community life as a culture of the kingdom of God fall short of
the growth goals that have been 	defined 	as essential 	to the
maturity of the self. It is not enough to give a name or to create
an identity for an individual. The naming of reality by which
personal 	identity 	is formed 	and 	sustained 	is a function 	of
community, not the client or the therapist. The character of this
community will determine 	the significance of the identity and
reality by which the members 	are named.
For the 	early church, 	the 	ritual 	of Christian 	baptism 	was
sometimes enacted as a "household" 	or "family" ritual (c£ Acts
16:33). But even if performed with an individual, it was always
with the intent of baptizing the person into the community, and
it was always an act on behalf of the community. For many
people, the culture of the kingdom of God represented 	a break
with the previous family and kinship ties. This necessitated 	a

-- 70 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	99
praxis by which a new sense of family and kinship became a
concrete reality.
The 	church 	has 	never 	fully 	developed 	its 	function 	as a
"therapeutic 	bridge" for individuals who are without a strong
sense of identity and belonging in modem society. In fact, many
of the church's evangelistic methods may actually contribute to
the breakdown of the social identity of persons. The remarkable
proliferation of clients from within the Christian church who are
seeking therapeutic 	relief from personal and emotional stress
may be one indication of this.
While this phenomenon provides a "ready market" for Chris-
tian therapists, 	one has to question the root cause for such a
failure of psychological health among church members. It is the
concern of this book to present the case for a Christian approach
to therapy that will address the actual structures of Christian
community itself, both as a contributing 	cause to the lack of
emotional 	health 	among its members 	and 	as a resource 	for
providing a context where growth goals can be realized beyond
mere therapeutic 	gain.
For all its concentration 	on the 	concrete 	present 	and the
history in which one's present is grounded, the kingdom of God
is a culture that embodies 	a strong sense of the future. This
future does not merely extend the present into some ideal state
of existence beyond today, although that expectation exists. But
the concept of the future in the culture of the kingdom is that of
a reality that is coming into the present.
The kingdom of God presents the future as advent, as a reality
that is coming into the present out of the future. It is given as
promise and carries signs in the present of its coming to us. For
Christians, 	this advent 	has occurred 	in the coming of Jesus
Christ as the incarnation of God himself and, therefore, as the
embodiment 	of the future that belongs to all who are in the
kingdom. The physical and psychical healings 	performed 	by
Jesus can be understood as dramatic signs of ultimate wholeness
and healing.
Promise, then, does not mean escaping the present, but using
the future as a basis for belief and as a growth goal by which the
self can experience integration and wholeness. Promise enables
and empowers us to grasp with hope the present 	and all its
imperfections and uncertainties. The maturity of faith integrates
hope into a realistic and creative approach to life.

-- 71 of 91 --

100 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
How can people 	experience 	now this hope 	that provides
wholeness and faith? Through forgiveness of sin, for one thing.
Absolution is not merely a formal pronouncement, 	because it
liberates 	us from the consequences 	of our actions and from
psychological and spiritual anguish. It assures us that our hope
for forgiveness and freedom from sin will not in the end be
betrayed.
Beyond the therapeutic gain that comes from dealing with the
inner psychological dynamics of guilt through confession, there
is the growth goal of absolution as an act of the community.
Here, too, the therapist must mediate between the client and the
community, which uses the therapist to embody its culture as a
people 	of God.
Hope can also be experienced 	now in the promise that life
itself is a value and good that cannot be lost through one's own
feeling 	of insignificance 	or the threat 	of suffering and even
death. The kingdom of God does not make suffering a good, but
it affirms the one who overcomes suffering through patience and
steadfast hope.
Does my small life count? Does what I do, despite my failures
and even 	deliberate 	digressions 	from the good, really mean
something in the end? I should hope it does! The gift of God's
Spirit, the community upholding my baptism, and the reality of
belonging that grips me even when I suffer confusion, disorder,
or sickness-all 	these compel me to hope and empower me to
live.
Summary
These, 	then, 	are the themes 	of the kingdom of God as a
therapeutic 	context for Christians who counsel:
• 	A discerning wisdom that gives meaning and coherence to
those seeking help; this is the way that Jesus came to be
and share;
• 	A righteousness embodied in the moral structures of God's
people; this is the truth that Jesus came to be and create;
• 	A sense of identity communicated through a story in which
each person has a part; and a hope that compels faith to
value life and to love community; this is the life that Jesus
came to be and to give.

-- 72 of 91 --

THE KINGDOM OF COD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	101
In subsequent 	chapters we will explore some of the spiritual
dynamics that provide resources and a context for therapy from a
Christian perspective.
Notes
1. S. L. Halleck, The Politics of Therapy (New York: Harper & Row,
1971), 36.
2. Alvin C. Dueck, ••Ethical Contexts of Healing: Peoplehood and
Righteousness," 	Pastoral Psychology 35, no. 4 (Summer 1987): 249. I
am greatly indebted to Dr. Dueck for his contribution to my thinking
about the kingdom of God as a context and resource for therapy as well
as for the overall emphasis and some of the specific themes of this
chapter.
3. Samuel Southard, Theology and Therapy: The Wisdom of God in
a Context of Friendship (Dallas: Word Books, 1989), ix. Southard also
says, ..And this is why some theologies are defective in wisdom. They
do not prepare counselors for realistic testing of mind and heart. They
do not deal with the question, how do we receive and respond to God's
revelation? 	This misses a consistent 	theme 	of wisdom, that human
claims of righteousness 	may conceal as well as reveal the self' 	(2).
C. 	Stephen 	Evans 	makes 	a 	distinction 	between 	wisdom 	and
shrewdness. A shrewd person knows how to manipulate situations so as
to gain the most and lose the least. True wisdom, says Evans, means
understanding 	..one's own life, an understanding which may be painful.
But the fact that wisdom cannot be guaranteed by a technique does not
imply that nothing 	can be done to encourage 	the development 	of
wisdom" 	(Wisdom and Humanness in Psychology: Prospects for 	a
Christian Approach [Grand Rapids: Baker, 1989], 71).
4. Aristotle, 	The Nichomachean Ethics, IX, vi. 	5. For a more
extended 	discussion 	of the 	concept 	of praxis 	as 	applied 	to the
development 	of competence 	for ministry, 	see my article, ..Christo-
praxis: Competence 	as a Criterion for Theological Education," 	Theo-
logical Student's Fellowship Bulletin Oanuary-February 	1984): 10-
13.
5. For additional information on the concept of maturity or perfec-
tion, see Telos in The New International Dictionary of New Testament
Theology, vol. 2, ed. Colin Brown (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 	1976),
59-66.
6. Stanley 	Hauerwas, 	A 	Community 	of Character: Toward a
Constructive Christian Social Ethic (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1981), 134.
7. Kirk E. Farnsworth, 	Wholehearted Integration: Harmonizing
Psychology and Christianity Through Word and Deed (Grand Rapids:
Baker, 1985), 90.

-- 73 of 91 --

102 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
8. In Germany in the late nineteenth 	century, Wilhelm Dilthey
(1833-19ll) 	was outspoken in urging the need for a psychology that
sought to appreciate individuals as living entities capable of personal
integration. In the early part of this century, other German psychothera-
pists continued an emphasis on the whole person, including Wilhelm
Stem, Kurt Goldstein, and Edward Spranger. Other psychiatrists and
psychologists developed 	humanistic psychologies following this ten-
dency, including 	Alfred Adler, Karen Homey, 	Erich 	Fromm, Kurt
Lewin, Gordon Allport, and Carl Rogers. For an excellent survey of
some of these psychologies see Roger Hurtling, The Tree of Healing
(Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 	1988), chaps. 6- 7.
9. E. Brooks Holifield, A History of Pastoral Care in America: From
Salvation to Self-Realization (Nashville: Abingdon, 1983), 12.
10. Wolfhart Pannenberg, 	Christian Spirituality 	and Sacramental
Community 	(London: Dartman, Longman and Todd, 1983).
ll. 	Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1958), 322.

-- 74 of 91 --

5
The 	Grace of God as
Therapeutic 	Intervention
..My grace is sufficient for you." The thorn in the Hesh would
remain, but the apostle Paul would learn to live with it and even
confess that he was content (2 Cor. 12:9). Learning to live with a
physical 	disability 	and 	learning 	contentment 	are 	two quite
different things. For Paul, the grace of God was not merely a
sedative for discomfort; it transformed his soul.
For my friend Susie, the same is true. Afflicted with cerebral
palsy since birth, she speaks with extreme difficulty and walks
with lurching, spastic movements. When she completed her
master's degree in theology, I suggested that she might minister
to handicapped 	persons .
..I 	don't 	have 	that 	much 	in 	common 	with 	handicapped
people," she responded ... Most of them haven't forgiven God for
who they are, and I have."
Susie is writing a book that will share her perspective on life
and Christianity. The opening chapter is titled ..Being Normal
in an Abnormal World." Having a "thorn in the Hesh" doesn't
make us abnormal or less than a total person. 	Somewhere,
somehow, Susie and the apostle Paul realized that wholeness is
not the same as perfection.
The purpose of this chapter is to show more clearly how this
grace of God that effects an inner wholeness can be related to
therapeutic intervention. We will discuss first how dysfunction
relates to the concept of "whole person." Then we will look at
God's 	grace 	as 	a 	dynamic 	of the 	growth 	process 	and 	of
103

-- 75 of 91 --

104 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
reconciliation. Finally we will examine the intervention of grace
and conversion in the therapeutic 	process.
Being a Total Person When All the Parts Are Not Working
Therapeutic 	gains are relative and pragmatic. Growth goals
are essential and realistic. This is as clear a distinction as can be
made between healing and wholeness, or between function and
self-perception. The concepts of "growth process" and "growth
goals" are similar to what in chapter 3 we called the "agogic
situation," 	following the 	lead 	of Jacob 	Firet. 	This 	growth
process includes 	the release 	of a motive power for change,
involves the humanity of the counselor as intermediary, and
produces change and growth in the client. Thus growth goals are
related to the integrative and relational aspects of the self as
open to change and as defined by the nature of personhood as
presented 	in chapter 2.
Specific therapeutic 	objectives are relative to this essential
trajectory of growth and have their value in promoting integra-
tion and growth. It is in this sense that therapeutic gains are also
pragmatic. They are means to an end rather than being an end in
themselves.
The reality of the self is essential to the well-being of the self
as a relational being. When this reality is experienced as the
core of one's identity, it is "whole," though not always perfect in
function. Many levels of dysfunction limit a person's freedom to
move within his or her own environment. These limitations can
be physical, psychical, or spiritual, or some combination of each.
The essential reality of the self as the core of identity can be
expressed 	and experienced 	by others in its totality despite
certain levels of dysfunction.
This is obviously the case with regard to physical disabilities.
Physical impairment, even dismemberment, 	does not destroy
the "totality" of the self in its core identity. There are limitations
of function, to be sure, and these limitations constitute in many
cases severe losses at the experiential level for which the self
must compensate. This is also true for those with emotional and
mental 	disability 	or impairment. 	No parent 	with a Down's
syndrome child will tolerate the suggestion that the child is any
less a total person, despite the retardation of mental processes.
My friend 	Susie perceives 	herself as normal because 	she

-- 76 of 91 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	105
experiences a positive and tangible form of self-love through the
people who help her with the simplest functions of dressing and
eating. Most of us, being physically and mentally able to live
without the direct touch or presence of another person, live with
a high degree of autonomy. We are free to choose whether or not
we want to be touched or helped, or even whether we want to
be with other people. We think this is normal. Susie thinks it is
abnormal for people to live in an isolated and private world,
moving out to touch others only when there is need or desire.
She experiences 	grace as a whole and normal person despite
physical and mental frustrations and failures.
Psycho-spiritual forms of distress, including sinful attitudes
and dispositions, do not destroy the totality of personal identity.
God continues to address as fully personal those human beings
who 	are 	spiritually 	estranged 	and 	hostile. 	If we 	were 	not
essentially total persons, even as sinners and spiritually decrepit
people, 	we could not continue 	to create meaningful 	human
relationships 	and enter into social-personal community.
But there 	is a limit. The 	dysfunctions 	at every level 	can
become 	so severe that the totality of the person is virtually
concealed from view. The core of the self identity can become
so out of focus and tormented that this "wholeness" 	cannot be
sustained, except through the intentions of others who insist that
the self remain as it "really" is. Those who live with people in
an acute stage of Alzheimer's disease, for example, sustain the
totality of that afHicted person in a kind of vicarious way.
The point is this: therapeutic gains, whether through physical
therapy, 	psychotherapy, 	or 	pneuma-therapy 	(spiritual 	disci-
plines), are only relative gains. The gains in these areas can
never be total or permanent. There is a value to the gains, to a
point 	At the point where the cost of further gain is so great and
the gain so little, continued 	therapy may not be a pragmatic
value to the totality and reality of the self. This point, of course,
must be negotiated 	by each person 	to the extent that there
remains a core of identity on which to make the assessment.
The Growth Process as a Dynamic of God's Grace
The essential reality of the self and the core of identity gives
content to the growth goals, which are not related directly to the
therapeutic gains in any kind of deterministic or causal way. For

-- 77 of 91 --

106 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
example, a self-perception as a whole person, essentially good
and with a positive and hopeful attitude toward life, cannot be
produced 	though 	reducing 	anxiety alone. Psychotherapy 	can
reduce psychic trauma and enable persons to regain a fairly high
degree 	of function in daily living and work. But therapeutic
technique will not cause a person to perceive herself or himself
as whole and filled with self-love.
This is exactly the reason why Viktor Frankl concluded that
many 	people 	do 	not 	permit 	themselves 	to 	"escape" 	from
therapy. The "decision" 	that one is whole and that life is good
and has meaning is so difficult and threatening 	that the client
prolongs 	the 	treatment. 	When 	Frankl 	stopped 	treating 	the
psyche alone and instead challenged the person to meaning, he
discovered 	that in many cases people 	could 	live with 	their
anxieties and even neuroses if there were meaning and purpose
in their lives. And ·so logotherapy was born.
The merits or limitations of logotherapy are not the issue here.
Frankl' s experience, 	however, points to the well-known phe-
nomenon of people "suddenly" 	deciding they are well enough
to function without further therapy. In my judgment, this points
to what I call a contingent relation between psychic health and
personal 	wholeness. 	By "contingent" 	is meant 	a relation 	in
which there 	is some kind of correlation, but not a causal or
deterministic 	one. Being a whole person as a psychic-somatic
unity is contingent on some orientation toward or relation with a
source or power beyond 	the psychic-somatic entity itself.
The apostle Paul's 	"contentedness" 	with his life situation,
tormenting 	and inconveniencing 	as it was, resulted 	from his
perception 	that 	God 	had 	given 	him 	"grace." 	Susie 	put 	it
somewhat 	differently 	when 	she 	said that she had 	"forgiven
God" for who she is. But she had come to this inner place of
wholeness and self-acceptance because she had experienced the
love of others even as a small child. Realizing her physical
limitations and the acute loss that this meant to her in many
ways, she experienced 	God as free from the responsibility 	to
heal or change her. Thereby she could experience God and his
grace through the care and love of other persons. Their love
represents the love and grace of God on which her life depends.
They serve as intermediaries 	in the growth process.
I repeat, therapeutic 	gains are relative and pragmatic while
growth goals are essential and realistic. The long-range integra-

-- 78 of 91 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	107
tion and growth of the self may at times need specific therapeu-
tic intervention. Because the grace of God is experienced as a
dynamic process of change and growth, grace can also aid the
therapeutic process in its relative and pragmatic task of assisting
this 	growth. God's 	grace can be 	experienced 	as a fonn 	of
intervention 	through 	the 	growth 	process. 	This 	provides 	a
context for therapeutic procedures to function so as to contribute
to the growth goals.
The growth goals presuppose the totality of the self as a whole
person, even though the self is not perfect in all its functions.
This point is so vital to what follows that it must not be missed.
Being a whole person, or a total person in this dynamic sense, is
the very construct of personhood. In addressing the other person
as a self, one presupposes that the other is "really" a person and
that the potential of response inheres in the self. The growth
process can only exist where there is "equi-human" 	address, as
Jacob Firet has put it. The totality of human selfhood must be
equal and fully present on both sides of this process to provide a
context for therapeutic 	gain and to provide the motivation and
right moment for "escaping" from therapy, to use Frankl's term.
The 	biblical 	concept 	that 	the 	image 	of God 	constitutes
personhood thus establishes 	each person's core identity as an
essential, not merely functional, aspect of the self. To create and
enter 	into the growth process with other persons is, from a
Christian 	perspective, 	to recognize 	and 	affirm the 	essential
grace 	of God by which 	persons 	exist. This 	grace is not a
movement by God toward persons prompted by sin or by need
alone. It is by and through the grace of God that the self exists at
all in the freedom and mystery of personhood. Sin works against
this grace, denying the freedom and responsibility 	to love.
Grace is the 	freedom 	of God expressed 	creatively 	as the
..encounter" 	that preserves humanity in personal relation with
God and 	with 	other 	persons. 	Theologians 	have 	called 	this
..common grace," though it should not be confused with some
impersonal attribute that belongs to nature. Common grace is
the positive, personal, and continual intervention 	of God that
prevents the cosmos and its creatures from slipping into chaos
and "falling out of' 	the reality of being created and related.
This is one way of understanding the biblical meaning of sin
and the "sinner." 	Because God continues 	to intervene 	when
persons 	act self-destructively 	and negatively, he preserves 	a

-- 79 of 91 --

108 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
"real history" of the person instead of mere fate. Actions that
deny and destroy love as the bond of relationship with God and
the neighbor rebound to God himself. This is at once terrifying
and hopeful. It is terrifying, because now the self must confront
the essential and real instead of pragmatically accommodating
its fate. Yet it is hopeful, because now the grace of God, which is
the original basis for one's essential and real existence, inter-
venes in this self-deception and self-destruction.
In 	his 	perceptive 	book Life 	and Faith, W. W. Meissner
suggests that a theology of divine grace must be accompanied by
a psychology of grace. "Grace not only alters our theological
condition, changing us in reference 	to the supernatural," 	he
writes, "but it delves into our very nature and makes contact
with the depths of our psychic reality.'' 1 A psychology of grace
means more than transposing theological insights and terms into
psychological language. Grace is divine action motivating the
receptive psyche. Meissner adds that
the action of grace must make a difference to the living of the
Christian life. It must alter our experience and the course of our
life cycle. This does not mean 	that the action of grace is itself
immediately experienced, but it does mean that we are somehow
changed and presumably spiritually assisted and advanced by its
inHuence.ll
What Firet called the "motive power" released in the "agogic
moment," Meissner calls the effect of grace as a psychological
dynamic of change in behavior.
Corresponding to the work of Erik Erikson in a psychology of
personal identity development, 	Meissner argues that we must
have a psychology of spiritual identity development that views
the grace of God as the ego's source of energy and direction.
Spiritual identity, he suggests, Hows out of the same ego center
in the self as personal identity. Where lack of a healthy ego
impairs the development of personal identity, spiritual identity
will also suffer. This is the core ofMeissner's 	integrative model.
While 	therapeutic 	intervention 	using 	strictly 	psychological
means can assist the ego in developing a personal identity, it
cannot assist in developing spiritual identity, for this can only
take 	place 	through 	the 	intervention 	of divine 	grace. 	Such
therapeutic 	intervention 	only partially recovers the essential

-- 80 of 91 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	109
function of the ego, for spiritual identity is also necessary to the
complete identity 	of the self as created in the divine image.
Psychoanalytic therapy cannot produce spiritual identity, says
Meissner, 	but 	the 	intervention 	of grace 	can 	promote 	this
spiritual 	development 	and 	also 	assist 	in 	the 	ego's 	task 	of
personal identity development. 	This is true because 	spiritual
identity is a function of the ego and thus is directly related to
both divine grace and the psyche. Therefore, using "means of
grace" in the therapeutic 	process will promote both personal
and spiritual growth.
Grace is the energizing and relational principle on the spiritual
level for the proper functions of the ego. Development of spiritual
identity, then, is achieved through the same ego-functions that are
involved in the natural psychological identity. The relation be-
tween these two levels is based on the operation of the common
functions: in terms of psychological identity, these 	functions
operate on their own, but in terms of spiritual identity, there is an
added component supplied through grace.3
While I do not totally agree with Meissner's assumption that
grace merely "perfects nature," so that the ego's natural state is
"without grace," I do think his emphasis on the psychological
effects of grace on both personal and spiritual growth contrib-
utes greatly to our understanding of the integration of grace into
the therapeutic 	process.
The grace of God creates anew the growth process out of the
autonomy and 	self-preserving 	motivations of those who Hee
from God and conceal themselves from their neighbor. For this
reason 0. Hobart Mowrer has said that "sin is the lesser of two
evils" as compared with sickness. When sin is understood as a
personal construct rather than an impersonal "condition," 	the
possibilities 	of "radical redemption" 	are opened 	up.•
Because the self is real from the very beginning, the potential
for growing into a mature person is based on the totality of the
self as person. This "potential" 	is the freedom of the self to
move on the psycho-spiritual continuum in a process of change,
growth, and development. When people are confronted by the
reality of grace, they are confronted by the reality of God. One
cannot have grace without 	God. But grace presupposes 	the
freedom of the person to respond, and therefore grace creates
and gives freedom as the motive power oflove. Freedom to love

-- 81 of 91 --

110 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
does not come from autonomy and self-will, but from the growth
process in which we experience the reality of our personal being
in the relation as necessary to the relation.
The theologian 	Otto Weber puts it this way:
The epitome of that kind of existence in which we are free but not
autonomous, in which we are neither the functionaries nor the
autonomously cooperating partners of God, is love. It accords with
the state of man's existence which is defined by the Spirit. Thus it
is the form in which the good command of God arrives at its right
in us-just 	as the «law" reaches its goal and its end in Christ
(Rom. 10:14), love is the «law's" fulfillment (Rom. 13:10; c£ Matt.
22:40 and John 13:34).s
While love is the motive power for change and growth, it is not a
product of therapeutic gain, nor is it a result of psychic healing.
Love is the effect produced by grace, which gives freedom to
respond, 	where 	the 	response 	itself 	is 	expected 	and 	even
demanded by the relation. This is why Jesus commanded us to
love 	one 	another. 	This 	command 	to love 	is not an 	ethical
demand, but one that comes through the intervention 	of grace.
Grace intervenes into our self-isolation and penetrates our self-
deception 	to give 	us freedom 	to love 	in response. 	This 	is
because, 	as Meissner has shown, grace energizes 	the ego to
make new and healthy 	responses 	in terms of both personal
identity and spiritual identity. Love is therefore a goal that is
transformative in nature and a process of development along the
psycho-spiritual 	continuum.
The goal of this development is included in the process. That
is what constitutes this growth as praxis rather than merely the
"making" of a product. Praxis is the process of creating the truth
through being and doing. The growth process therefore is a form
of praxis. The praxis of growth talces place when a motive power
for change and growth is released by which the self grasps the
reality and totality of personal 	life as essential to the core of
identity. It is as normal as the first step of a baby, as difficult as
the first "word" learned by Helen Keller in the silent darkness
of total impairment 	of sight and hearing. 	It is as ordinary as
gaining a new friendship, as extraordinary as experiencing God.

-- 82 of 91 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	111
The I nteroention of Grace as Reconciliation
Why is the grace of God that leads to wholeness and love so
difficult to experience? 	It may be because the human self is so
proficient 	in self-deception! 	Psychotherapists 	who work with
people seeking emotional healing often find that self-deception
is a common problem 	in their 	clients.
"Wounded 	individuals 	who seek relief through psychother-
apy," says Walter Becker, "usually present 	distortions, 	smoke-
screens, misperceptions, 	and evasions in their experience 	and
description 	of reality."& Healing growth must, therefore, come
through correcting this self-deception, which manifests itself in
many ways, including reaction formation, repression, and ration-
alization. Becker concludes that the task of psychotherapy 	is to
lead people to a more realistic, authentic 	perception 	of them-
selves. I believe this is true, but I would argue that this problem
cannot be resolved 	through 	therapy 	alone.
Fundamentally, 	self-deception, 	which is one way of under-
standing the psychology of sin as a prevailing disposition, is not
merely a denial 	of reality but is also a denial 	of grace. Self-
deception is a form of spiritual autonomy. The self retreats into a
private place and perceives reality through the prism of the self
alone. The primary deception is not what the self perceives, but
the selfs 	being autonomous and private. Grace is the creative
freedom that relates the self and will not permit this autonomy
of self-perception.
One of the basic self-deceptions is the religious self. I suggest
that a significant number of neurotic and even psychotic people
manifest their distortions in some kind of religious experience
or perception. 	For this reason the therapist cannot assume that
the religious self is a reliable source of wholeness on which to
build. In my judgment, those who seek to integrate theology and
psychology by integrating religious values and perceptions 	into
therapy can mistake religious life for integrative life. Religious
behavior 	and 	religious 	values 	can be 	incorporated 	into 	the
psychological construct of the human personality, both in theory
and in practice. The question is whether or not this merging of
psychology and religion is really the integration of God's grace
into the human 	integrative 	task itself.
The Episcopal clergyman Carroll E. Simcox puts it this way:

-- 83 of 91 --

112 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
"Christianity 	begins where 	religion ends-with 	the Resurrec-
tion." The reference here is specifically to the resurrection of
Christ rather than to that transition to experiencing God as a
companion 	which 	is the 	final stage of religion. 	There 	is a
connection between 	the two, but they are not identical. The
believer 	knows that 	God's 	companionship 	is not a delusion
because he or she knows Christ as real and present, in the power of
his resurrection. 7
The religious self as well must be corrected, or "sanctified" by
grace. While the theological concept of "atonement" 	is consid-
ered 	a religious 	ritual and 	experience, 	religion 	itself needs
"atonement," 	otherwise it becomes another form of self-decep-
tion. For this reason the theological construct of reconciliation
through 	grace is more far-reaching and productive 	than 	the
concept of "atonement 	for sin."
The doctrine of the atonement, while a valid and necessary
component of a theology of redemption from sin, is too narrow a
construct 	on 	which 	to 	develop 	a 	strategy 	and 	practice 	of
intervention by which saving grace can enter into the psycho-
therapeutic 	process.
Why is the doctrine of the atonement 	too narrow for this?
Precisely because the doctrine itself tends to reflect an inherent
dichotomy between 	an objective atonement in terms of God's
saving action 	in 	Christ 	on the 	one 	hand, 	and 	a subjective
appropriation of this work in the person on the other. This is
true whether 	one views the atonement 	as a vicarious act of
God's 	love that took place 	"on behalf' 	of sinners 	or as an
example for motivating sinners to love. Here we see the swing
between the objective and subjective sides of the issue, with no
real union of the two. Again, Otto Weber helpfully comments:
Jesus' work is not to be compared with a legacy which was set up
"objectively" for our benefit and which we must then lay claim to
on the basis of our own knowledge and our own decision. Nor can
it be compared with a payment which someone else has made in
our favor, and which now appears, as it were, on our account
record, and which we then may dispose of as we please. The
personal character of reconciliation opposes all such views.a
God's 	saving activity includes 	the 	behavior 	of those 	who
participate 	in it, says Weber. This "subjective" 	aspect of the
salvation of God is also part of the saving activity of God, not

-- 84 of 91 --

mE 	GRACE OF GOD AS mERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	113
merely a human appropriation of an objective truth. 9 A doctrine
of so-called substitutionary atonement, continues Weber, does
not mean that Jesus' life and death are a "substitution" 	for my
life, but an "intervention" 	into it through the incarnation and
resurrection of the "crucified God," to use Jurgen Moltmann's
term.IOIn this way knowledge and love are not subject to the
same polarity or dichotomy, but unite in the personal character
of God's saving activity, which is always contemporary. How
can this be?
The atonement is not based on the historical event of Christ's
death alone. The basis for the atonement is the person of Jesus
Christ, the one who died on behalf of all human beings and then
was resurrected. The atonement is not an "objective" thing that
we as "subjective" 	persons need 	to appropriate 	by our own
cognitive act of belief. It is Jesus Christ, the living God, who
graciously encounters 	us in the growth process.n
We sometimes think of atonement abstractly as a concept or
doctrine 	rather 	than 	as 	the 	saving 	activity 	of God 	in 	the
incarnate, crucified, and resurrected Christ-an 	activity that is
personal and contemporary. If this happens, 	attempts to per-
suade clients to "believe" in the atonement as a basis for feeling
forgiven will come to grief over the subject-object polarity that
Weber warns against. For the kind of intervention that occurs
with 	God's 	saving 	activity 	does 	not 	take 	place 	through 	a
cognitive grasp of an abstract truth. Rather, the intervention is
through the power and presence 	of the Holy Spirit. And the
Holy Spirit is not communicated through ideas or concepts, but
through persons.
Here we see what is implied in the statement "when religion
comes to an end, Christianity begins." For if grace is rooted in
religion, there will be no real intervention. And when God does
not intervene into the human situation, religion can be only a
subjective 	experience, 	with no objective (ontological) reality
originating in God. The 	counselor 	who views atonement 	as
merely an objective (metaphysical) value or concept and intro-
duces it into the therapeutic process as a form of"God talk"will
fail on two counts: by thrusting 	a religious concept into the
therapeutic process and so confusing the therapeutic dynamic;
and by seeking to ground Christian faith in mere dogma.12
My purpose to this point has been to show that a doctrine of
atonement is too narrow a focus on which to build a relationship

-- 85 of 91 --

114 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
between God's saving action and psychotherapy. 	Rather, atone-
ment is a continuous activity of God's saving grace, which took
place 	"once 	and for all" 	in the 	incarnation, 	crucifixion, and
resurrection 	of Jesus 	Christ, 	but 	which 	also 	includes 	the
sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit in the Christian's 	life.
Where 	religion 	comes 	to 	an 	end 	and 	where 	Christianity
begins is at this point of intervention, or sanctification. Religion
cannot of itself sanctify; it can only point toward the need for
sanctification as a gracious intervention 	and source of healing.
The Christian experience of sanctifying grace, of course, is not a
substitute for religion. The religious life of a Christian in whom
the Holy Spirit dwells is itself sanctified. This means that God
has related the person to himself in such a way that the deepest
religious needs and aspirations of that person are authentically
affirmed and fulfilled.
This is why I prefer the theological concept of reconciliation
to the narrow theme 	of atonement 	as a way of understanding
grace as intervention 	and transformation of the self. Reconcilia-
tion suggests encounter, 	it requires 	dynamic movement 	from
both parties, 	and it encompasses 	the whole self as a psycho-
somatic unity. Reconciliation thus comprises the growth process
described 	in the preceding 	chapter. And reconciliation 	allows
for a mediator, 	a 	role 	that 	the 	Christian 	therapist 	is 	well
qualified to fulfill.
The relation of the grace of God to the therapeutic process can
be summarized 	as follows:
• 	The 	integration 	of the 	self as a whole 	person 	includes
adjusting to facts, experiences, 	and limitations in life that
cannot easily be changed;
• 	Therapeutic 	gains can be made that will enable the self to
reinterpret 	and cope with these 	factors and experiences;
• 	These therapeutic 	gains are relative to the process of the
integration and growth of the self along the life continuum;
these gains are useful to the degree that they achieve this
goal;
• 	The grace of God brings a new, creative resource 	to the
ego's task of growth and integration, at the level of personal
and spiritual 	identity;
• 	The theological concept of sin has its psychological effects

-- 86 of 91 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	115
in 	isolating 	and 	weakening 	the 	ego's 	power 	to recover
authentic 	personal 	and spiritual 	identity 	and growth;
• 	The doctrine 	of the atonement 	from sin through 	Christ's
life, death, 	and 	resurrection 	has its psychological 	effect
through the grace of forgiveness and healing, which gives
motive power to the self to experience 	new life and hope;
• 	This is reconciliation 	at the personal 	and spiritual 	level.
The Intervention of Grace and Conversion
The specific intervention 	of grace that heals the individual's
relation to God, others, and self can be understood 	as a kind of
"conversion." 	Setting aside the narrower concepts of conversion
that tend to stereotype 	a form of religious experience, 	we can
view conversion as a transformation of the self through a process
of change 	and development.Ia
The 	origins 	of conversion 	as a phenomenon 	of orientation
toward God that encompasses the whole of one's life will always
be somewhat ambiguous, 	especially 	from a cultural, sociologi-
cal, psychological, 	and anthropological 	perspective. 	The theo-
logical perspective 	views the origins of conversion with relative
indifference, 	for it is not a critical issue for theology. What is
essential is that the source of the power motivating change and
growth be grounded 	in love, particularly 	in the love of God as
expressed through Jesus Christ. Conversion is the selfs orienta-
tion toward the true source of wholeness, 	which, for Christian
theology, 	is God as revealed 	through 	Christ and experienced
through the power of the Holy Spirit. Conversion, therefore, 	is
more than a psychological 	or religious phenomenon. 	It is that
intervention 	of divine grace that effects change and growth. It is
the 	experienced 	salvation 	or healing 	that is God's 	gift to all
through 	Christ.
It is well known that the Greek word soteria as used in the
New Testament 	means not only "deliverance," 	but "healing."
The 	frequent 	association 	of the 	word with 	deliverance 	from
physical illness in the Synoptic gospels strongly points to this
relationship 	(cf. Mark 10:52; Luke 8:48; Matt. 9:22). When Peter
is asked by which authority he had healed the lame man at the
gate of the temple 	(Acts 3:1-10), 	he answered 	that it came by
the name ofJesus 	Christ, whom God raised from the dead. Peter
then said that "there 	is salvation in no one else, for there is no

-- 87 of 91 --

116 	CHfilSTIANS WHO COUNSEL
other name under heaven given among men by which we must
be saved" (Acts 4:12). God's saving work in Jesus Christ was "at
work" through the Holy Spirit's intervention 	in the lives of the
apostles. Thus healing occurred not merely through conveying
information 	about 	Jesus, 	but 	also through 	the 	Holy 	Spirit's
"filling" 	the apostles 	with power 	(Acts 2:4; 3:33, 38; 4:8).14
Through the Holy Spirit, Christians represent in their encoun-
ters with others the presence 	and transforming power of Christ.
The 	Christian 	counselor 	experiences 	the 	sanctifying grace of
Christ through the therapeutic 	relation. This sanctifying grace
breaks the selfs 	bondage to sin and bonds it to God, allowing
the self freely to seek the meaning of the religious experience.
Conversion, which lies at the heart of sanctification, is not a
one-time event. Nor is it a crisis to be induced 	for the sake of
alleviating 	anxiety or distress. 	Rather, as Karl Barth has said,
conversion
is the affair of the totality of the whole life-moment of [persons]. To
live a holy life is to be 	raised and 	driven 	with increasing
definiteness from the centre of this revealed truth, and therefore to
live in conversion with growing sincerity, depth and precision.us
Conversion 	must begin 	outside 	the self, because 	it is not a
natural movement of the religious sel£ Instead, 	it results from
God's intervening grace, which enables the religious self to turn
away from its own striving to receive the gift of God's saving
work. But this beginning has no end; it does not merely become
an "event" 	of one's historical life. Conversion is the work of the
sanctifying 	Spirit 	of Jesus 	Christ, 	which 	opens 	up 	the 	nar-
rowness 	of individual 	existence 	to 	existence 	in 	grace 	and
community 	of life. Thus the call to sanctification in the New
Testament 	is no mere private matter, but is addressed 	to the
collective, 	or communal, 	person.
From this we can see that conversion as the saving work of the
sanctifying Spirit of Jesus Christ is a work of grace that promotes
mental health in healing the estranged and narcissistic individ-
ual. The evidences 	of this ongoing conversion in a person's life
are, first, a confession of faith in Jesus as the truth in which one
believes 	as an objective fact, and second, a profession of faith
that is marked by love of God, neighbor, 	and self.
When the therapist 	discerns no evidence 	of such conversion
in the life of the client, the Holy Spirit may yet enable the client

-- 88 of 91 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	117
to experience the saving work of Christ. A client may profess
faith in Christ at any point on the continuum of growth. Such a
conversion is not a "shortcut" to mental health, but a resource of
divine 	grace to enable 	the therapeutic 	process to become 	a
sanctifying work of grace.
Here is where the significance of the growth process can again
be seen. When the therapist is a Christian and when presence
and encounter take place between the therapist and the client at
the growth level, the therapist mediates the grace of God. This
kind 	of intervention 	is appropriate 	for a Christian 	therapist
because 	it 	does 	not 	use 	therapeutic 	technique 	to produce
conversion to Christ, nor does it make conversion an object of
therapeutic gain. It is also true, however, that the context for the
therapy experience 	will need to be defined explicitly for the
client at the outset so that the growth goal of experiencing the
grace of God is established as a horizon in which the therapeutic
work can be done. Conversion is not a therapeutic gain. But the
grace of God can work through the intervention 	of a therapist
who is a believer 	in Christ, and conversion can be a result
If the client is already a Christian, Christ's sanctifying grace
can search out the sin that may lurk behind the symptoms of
mental illness. The therapist may practice the intervention 	of
forgiveness and enable 	the client to move positively through
therapeutic 	techniques 	of healing 	toward 	mental 	health 	as
therapeutic 	gain and personal wholeness 	as a reality of self-
perception. 	"Absolution" 	may also take place, 	the 	therapist
mediating the grace of God that affirms wholeness.
The theological and liturgical form of absolution is expressed
through 	the pronouncement 	of forgiveness of sins based 	on
personal confession of sin and the seeking of God's grace. The
psychological 	effect 	of absolution 	as "realized 	forgiveness"
includes release from the self-defeating and self-denying cycle
of guilt, shame, and contrition. This manifests itself in renewal
of self-esteem, in openness to change and growth at the personal
and spiritual 	levels, and in behavior 	that reflects this inner
experience 	of grace and forgiveness.
To say that a Christian counselor may serve as an intermediary
for this "absolution" is not to suggest that the therapist replaces
the priest or that psychological release from feelings of guilt
replaces authentic forgiveness of sin. Rather, it is to suggest that
the 	effects of grace as psychological 	health 	and 	wholeness

-- 89 of 91 --

118 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
manifest in personal 	and social relations constitute 	precisely
what the Bible means by conversion, repentance, 	and forgive-
ness of sin. Absolution that is merely "pronounced" 	and not
"experienced" 	falls short of being the transforming and renew-
ing grace of God it is intended to be. In my view, Christians who
counsel 	can become 	an 	important 	agent 	in 	that 	process 	of
"realized 	forgiveness."
When the 	Christian 	therapist 	practices 	the 	intervention 	of
grace as a sanctifying process of conversion, the Christian client
need not experience a dichotomy between religious experience
and psychotherapy. 	Rather, the therapist 	will share with the
client an experience of the real presence of Christ through the
Holy Spirit's intervention.
In the 	growth process there 	is no confusion between 	the
sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit and therapeutic 	technique,
and no confusion between therapeutic gain and the growth goals
of personal and spiritual wholeness. This Christian approach to
therapy 	does 	not 	use 	psychological 	techniques 	to 	achieve
religious 	results. 	Rather, the 	growth process 	is the 	dynamic
context of encounter in which the therapist creates the environ-
ment 	for the 	grace 	of God 	to intervene 	in a gracious and
transforming way.
Summary
In this chapter we have seen that the counselor can mediate
the grace of God in such a way that intervention is made into the
restricted and often dysfunctional life of another person. This
reality of God's grace is not only a motive power for change and
growth, but also a therapeutic 	resource that makes therapeutic
methods 	even 	more 	effective 	in establishing 	a trajectory 	of
lifelong growth and wholeness.
"My grace is sufficient," said the risen Christ to the apostle.
This was heard as the Word of God and produced in the hearer
the reality of grace. The Word of God, too, provides a strategy of
intervention for the Christian therapist. The role of Scripture in
the therapeutic process will be the subject for the next chapter.
Notes
1. W. W. Meissner, 	S.J., M.D., Life 	and Faith: Psychological
Perspectives on Religious Experience (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown
University Press, 1987), 5.

-- 90 of 91 --

TIIE GRACEOF GOD AS TIIERAPEUTICINTERVENTION 	119
2. Ibid., 7.
3. Ibid., 58.
4. 0. 	Hobart Mowrer, The Crisis of Psychiatry and Religion
(Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1961). Mowrer writes, ..So long as we
subscribe to the view that neurosis is a bona fide 'illness,' without moral
implications or dimensions, our position will of necessity continue to
be an awkward one. And it is here I suggest that, as between the
concept of sin (however unsatisfactory it may in some ways be) and that
of sickness, sin is indeed the lesser of two evils. We have tried the
sickness horn of this dilemma and impaled ourselves upon it. Perhaps,
despite our erstwhile protestations, we shall yet find sin more conge-
nial" (50-51).
5. Otto Weber, Foundations of Dogmatics, vol. 2 (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1983), 327.
6. Walker Becker, ..Healing and Spiritual Disciplines," Journal of
Christian Healing 6, no. 2 (Fall 1984): 35.
7. Carroll E. Simcox, ..On Being Both Christian and Religious,"
Christian Century, (18 April 1984): 398-400.
8. Weber, Foundations of Dogmatics, 2:229.
9. Ibid., 233.
10. Jurgen Moltmann, The Crucified God (New York: Harper & Row,
1974).
11. Otto Weber warns against making the atonement purely "objec-
tive" as an abstract concept. "Hit were the case that God, in the person
and the work (the personal work) of Jesus Christ, simply set up a 'fact'
and then made this fact available to us through the Holy Spirit in the
Church, it would be our task to recognize, agree to, trust in, and
'appropriate' that 'fact.' God would not have acted for us in a valid way,
but would have merely given us a 'chance,' or sent forth a power which
we would have to permit to have its effect on us. The subject-object
polarity this implies would make God's grace in its relationship to us an
object, to which we would have to address ourselves, or which inhered
in us. But, as we saw, God has by no means caused merely a 'chance' to
be made available to us nor initiated the momentum which then leads
to salvation. No, he has made Christ Jesus 'our wisdom, our righteous-
ness and sanctification and redemption' 	(1 Cor. 1:30). In the Holy
Spirit, our own freedom is God's work, the gift of his free grace"
(Foundations of Dogmatics, 2:412).
12. H. Newton Malony, for example, suggests that "God talk," as the
introduction of a set of religious values based on the assumption of
divine reality and love, can appropriately be used as part of the
psychotherapeutic 	task. I view this as an attempt to build on an
inherent religious aspect of the self, which may already be part of the
deception of the self and thus needs to experience the intervention and

-- 91 of 91 --

