COUN 5773: Theology and Counseling 
Article Review 
 
20% of Total Grade for the Course 
 
Construct a 1000-1500-word response to the constructive ideas found in an integrative reading or article of approximately 20-40 pages of scholarly material that engages the intersection of theology and counseling. Students may choose from the below options or propose another option to the professor. 
 
Students should consider using this article review as part of their research for their major paper, the Faith and Counseling Integration paper, that is due at the end of the term. 
 
The assignment should spend approximately 50-percent of the space summarizing the material from the article or reading and 50-percent of the space evaluating its worth for their own research into areas including (usually some but not all of these areas of) theology, religious practices, morality and ethics, advocacy and justice, and counseling. 
 
Several representative and preapproved options (note: these, in particular, are theological recommended theological options, and other options focused more on counseling and ethics and other areas are welcomed for this assignment), posted as PDFs in Discovery, include: 
 
Augustine, D. (2019). "Equality, Justice, and Peace." The Spirit and the common good: Shared flourishing in the image of God (pp. 108-120). Eerdmans.  
Balswick, J. O., Balswick, J. K., and Frederick T. V. (2021) “Part 1: Theological and Social Perspectives on Family Life.” In The Family : A Christian Perspective on the Contemporary Home (pp 21-64). Baker.
 
Buber, M. (1958). I-Thou (R.G. Smith, trans.) (pp. 3-23). Scribner.  
 
Dreyfus, H. and Taylor, C. (2015). "Fusing Horizons," In Retrieving Realism (pp. 102-130). Harvard University Press.  
Folsom, M. (2004). "Recursion: A Theological Axiom for Relationships," Marriage & Family: A Christian Journal 7:3,  199-214.
 
McGrath, A. (2017). Human Nature, Sin, and Grace. In Christian Theology (pp. 327-353).  Wiley-Blackwell.  
 
Murphy, N. (2018). Christian Anthropology, Philosophy, and Science. In A Philosophy of the Christian Religion (pp. 210-251). Westminster John Knox.  
  
Rennebohm, S. & Thoburn, J. (2021). Incarnational psychotherapy: Christ as the ground 
of being for integrating psychology and theology. Pastoral Psychology 70, 179-190.
Smith, J.K.A. (2016). "You are what you love: to worship is human." In You are what you love: the spiritual power of habit (pp. 1-25). Brazos.Stearns, C. (2025). Trauma-Informed Christology: ‘Healing Happens “After no Body Becomes Some Body”’.” In Christ & Trauma: Theology East of Eden (pp. 169-189). Wipf & Stock. 
John Swinton (2001) “The Neglect of the Spiritual.” In Spirituality and Mental Health Care : Rediscovering a 'Forgotten' Dimension (pp. 40-63). Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Whitney, W. B. (2020) “Beginnings: Why the Doctrine of Creation Matters for the Integration of Psychology and Christianity.” Journal of Theology and Psychology Vol. 48 (1) 44-65.
 
Students are to either choose one of the pre-approved options or to write an e-mail to the professor two weeks prior to the due date for the assignment with the proposed reading for approval. The e-mail should briefly explain (in several sentences) why this article is worthy of the student’s time and appropriate for their research into the integration of faith, ethics, and counseling. 
 
 
Grading Rubric:  
 
Grading Area 
  
A-range  
B-range  
C-range  
D- and F-range  
Followed 
Directions (10%)  
All directions are 
properly followed.  
Almost all directions are properly followed.  
Several lapses in following directions.  
Numerous lapses in following directions.  
 
 
Quality of 
Writing (20%)  
No or almost no errors in writing. Quality of writing is altogether appropriate to a course at the master’s level.  
Several writing errors. Quality of writing is mostly appropriate to a course at the master’s level.  
A number of writing errors. Quality of writing includes lapses inappropriate to a course at the master’s level.  
Regular errors or problems in writing. Quality of writing has regular lapses inappropriate to a course at the master’.  
 
APA Formatting (10%)  
Documentation is entirely or almost entirely in conformity with APA formatting and style.  
Documentation is mostly in conformity with APA formatting and style.  
Documentation has regular lapses in conformity with APA formatting and style.  
Documentation lacks conformity with APA formatting and style. 
 
  
Quality of Article 
Summary 
(30%)  
Summarization demonstrates quality interpretation of 
article at a graduate student level.  
Summarization demonstrates interpretation of article mostly but not entirely at a graduate student level. 
Summarization demonstrates interpretation of article sometimes at a graduate student level. 
Summarization lacks quality and is altogether not at a graduate student level.  
 
 
  
Quality of Article Evaluation (30%)  
Constructs an evaluative response to the article that includes consideration of its value for the field of counseling at a graduate student level. 
Constructs an evaluative response to the article that includes consideration of its value for the field of counseling mostly at a graduate student level. 
Constructs an evaluative response to the article that includes consideration of its value for the field of counseling somewhat at a graduate student level. 
Lacks a quality evaluative response to the article that includes consideration of its value for the field of counseling and is not at a graduate student level. 
 
 