Vol.:(0123456789)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11089-021-00940-x
1 3
Incarnational Psychotherapy: Christ as the Ground of Being
for Integrating Psychology and Theology
Samuel B. Rennebohm1 · John Thoburn1
Accepted: 22 January 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
The integration of psychology and theology is often sought as a layering of intellectual
abstractions from biblical and psychological sources. Though scriptural and scientific data
may partially define the reality of God and human psychology, the Truth is an embodied
act, God made incarnate among us as Christ. The common ground for integration of psy-
chology and theology must then be this ground of being, the incarnate presence of Jesus
Christ among us. The basis for integration is derived theologically from the relational
nature of and God and the ongoing revelation of Christ to humankind through incarnational
presence (i.e., social theology) and psychologically from the preeminence of relationships
in shaping human development, well-being, and psychological distress (i.e., interpersonal
psychology). This paper reviews both traditions in turn before then discussing the incarna-
tion of Christ as the ground of being for their integration. Incarnational relational enact-
ment is proposed to characterize the transformative presence of Christ in the healing work
of a therapeutic relationship. This process is described as immediate, personal, uncondi-
tional, and dialectical, ultimately leading to a literal renewing of the mind.
Keywords Incarnational relational enactment · Psychotherapy process · Integration · Social
theology · Interpersonal psychology · Corrective emotional experience
This article provides an incarnational model of psychotherapy, integrating social theology
with interpersonal psychology. It is our thesis that while biblical and psychological truths
provide context for the integration of psychology and Christian theology, only the incarna-
tion of Christ fully reflects the content of integration. The incarnation of Christ is aroused
through the dialogical therapy relationship, one exemplar of the kenotic community, where
Christ is made manifest in the in-between of the client-therapist relationship. The client
and therapist are ushered into the presence of God, and the relationship takes on quali-
ties that reflect the zeitgeist of Christ: immediate, personal, accepting, and dialectical. This
incarnational relational enactment leads to a corrective emotional experience (both punc-
tuated experiences and ongoing process) for the client, which in turn leads to neuro- and
* Samuel B. Rennebohm
rennebohms@spu.edu
1 	Seattle Pacific University, 3307 3rd Ave W, Seattle, WA 98119, USA
/ Published online: 11 February 2021
Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 1 of 13 --

1 3
synaptogenesis, going beyond cognitive, behavioral, and affective change to a true biopsy-
chosocial/spiritual transformation for the client.
Stevenson et al. (2007) define the integration of psychology and Christianity as “the
task of searching for the unity of truth, seeing things whole from a Christian perspec-
tive, and holistically attempting to relate elements of an objective real world given by
God at creation” (p. 5). Integration, from their perspective, is the search for a renewed
sense of truth through a unity of truth that emerges from combining the truths gleaned
from biblical and revelational sources with the truths discovered in psychological and
relational sources. The resultant phenomenological understanding is necessarily greater
than the sum of its constituent psychological and theological parts.
There can, however, be a problem with a focus on unity of truth if that unity is sought
as a layering of intellectual abstractions viewed apart from the ongoing, relational reve-
lation of Christ. Abstract biblical or psychological assertions become trivialized as fixed
datapoints and only acquire meaning through a detached process of intellectual interpre-
tation. Truth is considered only as the sum of these constituent data parts, without an
experiential understanding of the gestalt through which they are integrated. Truth apart
from the ongoing revelation of Christ reduces integration to a focus on abstract princi-
ples, and truths become little more than a sandwiching together of contemporary under-
standings of biblical and psychological concepts, data, and principles—more a parallel
process than the discovery of common ground.
Benner’s (2007) understanding of integration as incarnational metaphor and Farns-
worth’s (1985) idea of living as Jesus lived move us closer to an understanding of a
Christocentric approach to integration, but we need to recognize that “Jesus did not
become incarnate by embodying truths of an abstract or intellectual form. Rather his
very being is the truth” (Anderson 1990, p. 187). While the context for truth might be
biblical revelation and psychological principles, data, etc., the content of truth is bound
up in Jesus Christ as very man and very God. Tillich (1952) asserted that the essence
of Christ cannot be attributed to the model of behavior that he exemplified, his recorded
teachings, or the written gospels in which these appear. Instead, Tillich suggested that
the essence of Christ is his very being, the relational enactment of Christ among human-
ity. It is from this emphasis on the content of being that we read Jesus’ statement that “I
am the way and the truth and the light” (John 14:6 NRSV). Though there are scriptural
and historical truths that may partially define the reality of God, the Truth is an embod-
ied act, God made incarnate among us as Christ. The common ground for the integration
of psychology and theology must then be this ground of being, the incarnate presence of
Jesus Christ among us, and the ongoing revelation that we experience in relation to him.
To fully articulate the centrality of Christ’s incarnate being to psychological-theo-
logical integration, we will draw on both social theology and interpersonal psychology.
Social theology is premised on the relational nature of the triune God and argues for the
ongoing revelation of Christ to humankind through his incarnational presence. Interper-
sonal psychology focuses on the central role of relationships in shaping human develop-
ment, well-being, and psychological distress. We will begin by reviewing each of these
traditions in turn before discussing the incarnation of Christ as the ground of being
for their integration. In the final section, we will discuss the incarnational presence of
Christ in the therapeutic relationship between client and therapist. We will outline a
process of incarnational relational enactment through which the incarnate presence of
Christ facilitates true and healing renewal of the mind.
180 Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 2 of 13 --

1 3
Social theology and the kenotic community
Relational God
God’s triune nature is a defining feature of Christian theology. The Trinity simultaneously
identifies God as unified (homoousia) and differentiated (exousia), a single divinity rep-
resented in three persons. The most influential work in Western theology to deal with the
Trinity, Augustine’s De Trinitate, attempts to reconcile the inherent tension between God’s
singularity and multiplicity (Ables 2013). Augustine employed the use of metaphor to
illustrate the Trinity, describing the three persons as love, lover, and loved, with the defin-
ing feature being the relationship between persons (MacCulloch 2010). Father, Son, and
Spirit are constituted by virtue of the relational actions that link them. That is, Augustine
defined the Father and Son by their mutual love for one another and the Spirit as the pro-
cession of that love from one to the other. Augustine’s view of the Trinity is thus unified in
and through loving relationship (Ables 2013).
Subsequent readings of Augustine’s treatment of the Trinity have focused largely on
its relation to the 4 th
- and fifth century orthodoxy being codified in the language of the
Nicene and Apostles’ Creeds (MacCulloch 2010). Particular emphasis has been placed on
Augustine’s contributions to hierarchical understandings of the relationship between Trini-
tarian elements. As Johnson (1992) has noted, however, the ‘procession’ of relationships
described in Scripture is varied and nonhierarchical. In some passages, it is the Spirit pro-
ceeding forth from the Father, in some it is the Spirit giving life to the Son, and in still oth-
ers it is through the Son that we come to know the Father. Johnson (1992) suggested that
Augustine’s Trinity be understood primarily—by virtue of its relational language—as an
articulation of relationship characterized by mutual giving forth and receiving from. The
simultaneous and unified nature of Augustine’s Trinity also points to forms of relating that
do not involve dominance or hierarchy but are instead premised on mutuality.
Barth (1961) brought about a renewed interest in the theological significance of the
Trinity. Arguing for a strict focus on revelation as the primary means of knowing God,
Barth articulated his own analogy for the Trinity as revealer, revelation, and revealedness
(Torrance 2000). Barth unambiguously stated that God (i.e., creator), God’s act of revela-
tion (i.e., Spirit), and the content of that revelation (i.e., Christ) are all unified (1961). As
with Augustine, Barth’s analogy hinges upon the relational activity between elements of
the Trinity. His emphasis on revelation also inherently incorporates human subjectivity
into the relational nature of the Trinity. Not only is the Trinity defined by the simultaneous
relationality among its elements, but humanity is also entwined in that relationship as the
recipient of what is revealed. We are made to be simultaneous actors in the ongoing rela-
tional drama of the Trinity.
Barth’s theology points to revelation as the means through which humanity is drawn
into the relational nature of the divine. The embodied personhood of Christ is considered
the defining act of revelation and thus constitutive of God’s relational invitation to human-
ity (Barth 1961). Through the incarnation of Christ, the divine love shared among the
persons of the Trinity is extended to humanity. This love is also made vividly, tangibly
present among us through an act of fundamental humility. God’s self-emptying of divine
power and authority in order to take on the human form of Christ is referred to as kenosis
(Anderson 1979). For Barth, the kenosis is the vessel through which God’s relational love
is revealed among humankind. Through the kenosis—and thus the incarnation of Christ—
humanity is given a new model for relating, an invitation into reconciliation with God and
181	Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 3 of 13 --

1 3
with one another. We are called to enact the divine love by relating to one another as the
incarnated Christ related to us (Romans 14:5). Through the kenosis and incarnation, God
teaches us to meet one another as God has met us in Christ.
Kenotic community
Drawing on the kenosis as the defining feature of God’s relationship to humanity, the fel-
lowship summoned through incarnation can be understood as one of kenotic community
(Anderson 1979). The blueprint for this community is provided in and through the person-
hood of Christ. Its central precept is the self-emptying, empowering love of the kenosis.
That same love is repeatedly punctuated in the life and ministry of Christ, and the gospels
are replete with archetypal models for kenotic relating. There are the moments in which
Jesus subverts relational schema premised on dominance and subservience in order to
embrace (Matthew 8:3), invite (Matthew 9:9; Luke 5:27), engage (Luke 19:5–9), and for-
give (John 8:11). His rejection of hierarchy echoes the Trinitarian mutuality described by
Johnson (1992). Jesus also evokes the presence of this kenotic love as it is enacted among
humanity. In Luke 10:33–34, Jesus tells of the good Samaritan being so moved by love that
he set down his own preoccupations in order to care for the suffering of another. In Mat-
thew 25:35–40, Jesus affirms acts of hospitality, compassion, and humble relating from one
person to another as a fulfillment of the kenotic invitation. These examples all point to God
relating to the divine self through humanity. That is, acts of love derived from God reflect
back upon God and denote the divine nature (e.g., “God is love,” 1 John 4:8; Anderson
1979). The basic calling of the kenotic community is thus to encounter one another through
the self-humbling love made known to us in the revelation of Christ. By our participation
in the divine life, we become vessels for the transmission of God’s love between self and
others and between God and humanity.
In the kenosis, Christ divests himself of godliness in order to become human and relate
to humanity on human terms. In like manner, the kenotic community divests itself of
its human identification in order to participate in the very life of Christ. In doing so, the
kenotic community finds true purpose and meaning. Just as the loving relationship between
the figures of the Trinity is characterized by mutuality and parity (Johnson 1992), so too
are the relationships called forth by Christ in the kenotic community. Those in fellowship
must be willing to engage in a self-emptying with regard to the pretenses of dominance
and superiority. They must instead allow the spirit of Christ to penetrate their heart with
a yielding acceptance that then ensures that they will identify with the other on the same
level and footing.
Such humble openness aspires toward genuine relating between persons. It constitutes
what Buber (1958) has famously described as I-Thou relating, a level of deep openness to
the unfolding of relationship between individuals. Mismeeting, by contrast, includes some
level of insecurity, defensiveness, distancing, and claims premised on a perceived hierar-
chy. Mismeeting constitutes what Buber identified as I-It relating, a view of the other as
object rather than as mutually constituted subject.
Both Buber’s I-Thou relating and the genuine relating of kenotic community point to
the liminal space between mutually constituted subjects as the entry point through which
we encounter the divine. God, as the eternal Thou, is apprehended in and through relation-
ship, and the I of each individual is formed in the womblike in-between of I-Thou dialogue.
The dialogue allows each member to grow into the fullest embodiment of their own self
and to simultaneously embrace the fullest self of the other. This is made possible in and
182 Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 4 of 13 --

1 3
through an openness to the loving presence of Christ. It is the literal enactment of Jesus’
message from Matthew 18:20 that “where two or three are gathered in my name, there am
I in their midst” (NRSV). Entering into the genuine relating of the kenotic community thus
becomes a vivid experience through which we encounter the incarnate presence of Christ
and, through Christ’s spirit, participate in the divine life.
Interpersonal psychology
Interpersonal neurobiology
Human development is a complex, recursive system of interrelationships among the bio-
logical, psychological, and social aspects of personhood. We are formed, nurtured, and
socialized in and through relationship. Psychology has made significant strides in the past
20 years toward formally recognizing the significance of relationship in the formation of
personality and development of brain neurology (Schore 2011). The interdisciplinary field
of interpersonal neurobiology has emerged to account for the role of caregiver relation-
ships in childhood brain development (Gambrel et al. 2016). The core premise of interper-
sonal neurobiology is that healthy relationships with caregivers in infancy and early child-
hood allow the brain to develop optimal neural connections between the limbic system and
the prefrontal cortex (Fishbane 2007). These neural connections are then thought to facil-
itate adaptive psychological processes such as emotion regulation, acceptance, empathy,
and coping (Siegel 2007). Relationships with early caregivers (i.e., attachment) are central
to this process as they represent the initial interpersonal milieu through which infants and
children learn to relate to themselves and their environment (Siegel 2007; Vaughn et al.
2008).
Much of early brain activity occurs in the right orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), the region
of the brain most central to attachment and the attachment relationship (Minagawa-Kawai
et al. 2009; Parsons et al. 2013). The OFC serves the vital integrating function of coor-
dinating social communication, empathic attunement, emotional regulation, registration
of body states, stimulus appraisal, and self-awareness (Siegel and Hartzell 2003). One’s
genetic blueprint erects a rough neural scaffold of micro and macro anatomy connecting
the OFC with the more primal limbic areas such as the amygdala and thalamus (Fishbane
2007). These limbic structures are key for the processing of adverse emotions, particularly
fear and distress (LeDoux 2002). Early relational experiences fine-tune these neural con-
nections between the OFC and the limbic system into the specific neural pathways that
help to shape a person’s emotional identity (LeDoux 1998). It is generally believed that
relational experiences of acceptance, nurturance, and affection in infancy and early child-
hood substantially aid in the normative development of these neural connections. Such
theoretical assertions are supported by imaging studies associating supportive and attentive
parenting with more developed neural circuitry for emotion regulation and stress manage-
ment (Luby et al. 2012). Relationships thus represent the “ongoing experience [that] gradu-
ally transforms a child’s neural configuration... one synapse at a time” (Lewis et al. 2000,
p. 151).
Relationships continue to play an important role in brain development throughout the
lifespan. The presence of supportive caregiver relationships in childhood has been shown
to predict emotional stability and self-acceptance in adolescence as well as the qual-
ity of romantic relationships in adulthood (Gambrel et al. 2016). During the transition to
183	Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 5 of 13 --

1 3
parenthood, changes in brain anatomy take place as parents prepare for and then form new
relationships with the infant and child (Kim et al. 2010; Lambert 2012). Long-term friend-
ships and romantic relationships have also been associated with both brain structure and
function in late adulthood (Acevedo et al. 2012). These examples serve as a testament to
the importance of interpersonal connections over time in shaping normal psychological
functioning.
Psychopathology as broken relationship
When viewed from the perspective of interpersonal psychology, psychopathology repre-
sents a rupture in the relationships that help constitute healthy functioning (Thoburn and
Sexton 2016). Given the importance of secure relationships in cultivating emotion regula-
tion, empathy, and self-awareness, ruptures in our core relationships are thought to have a
detrimental effect on normal functioning (Slipp 1984). All relationships can have an impact
on psychological functioning, but close and emotionally intimate relationships are particu-
larly important. So too is the relationship that we have with ourselves—comprised of the
myriad of thoughts, beliefs, and feelings that we have about the self. When either form of
core relationship—either our relationship with the self or our relationship to those with
whom we have been emotionally vulnerable—are ruptured, there is a resulting dysregula-
tion of our psychological systems (Siegel 2007; Slipp 1984).
This has been most clearly demonstrated through the research on various forms of inse-
cure attachment. Disruptions in the infant-caregiver relationship as a result of neglect,
inconsistency, or hostility can lead to poor emotion regulation capacities on the part of the
infant (Zimmer-Gembeck et al. 2017). From a cognitive perspective, these insecure attach-
ment relationships can also lead to the development of foundational schemas for viewing
the self as damaged or inadequate and other people as dangerous or untrustworthy (Simard
et al. 2011). Maladaptive schemas formed through disrupted attachment relationships in
infancy can have a subsequently detrimental effect on other interpersonal relationships later
in life (McLean et al. 2014). The brain is hardwired for survival, and these maladaptive
schemas frequently employ an underlying fear response that is mediated by the limbic sys-
tem (Fellous and LeDoux 2005). This conditioned fear response results in aversion to the
healthy forms of emotional intimacy that characterize adaptive interpersonal functioning.
One of the hallmark features of a psychiatric disorder as defined by the most recent
diagnostic manual is impairment in one’s interpersonal relationships (American Psychiat-
ric Association 2013). While a simplistic causal attribution might view such impairment
as resulting from the disorder itself, a wealth of contemporary research points to the bidi-
rectional relationship between intrapersonal psychological distress and impaired interper-
sonal relationships (Whisman and Beach 2013; Whisman and Uebelacker 2003). Discord
in interpersonal relationships can cause, trigger, or compound psychological distress. That
same psychological stress can also make it difficult for individuals to fully engage in the
behaviors that constitute a healthy interpersonal relationship.
Limbic revision
Just as relationships can be a source of psychological distress, so too can they be a source
of much-needed healing. At a neurological level, the healing that occurs within relation-
ship likely unfolds through a process that again involves the linkages between the limbic
and the prefrontal cortex structures of the brain. This neurological change occurs when
184 Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 6 of 13 --

1 3
novel experiences are strong enough to aid in the formation of new neurons and synaptic
pathways between these structures. The limbic system is thought to be of primary impor-
tance in the processing of emotions, particularly the fear response that characterizes core
maladaptive schemas (LeDoux 1998). Repeated exposure to emotionally salient social
interactions in the absence of an aversive stimulus allows for the deconditioning of that
same fear response (Hayes et al. 2008). This process is likely aided by the genesis of new
neurons in the hippocampus region of the limbic system (i.e., neurogenesis; Apple et al.
2017), the strengthening of synaptic connections associated with adaptive emotion regula-
tion (i.e. synaptogenesis; Aupperle et al. 2013; Cisler et al. 2014, 2016), and the deteriora-
tion of synapses involved in dysregulation (Li et al. 2009). Therapeutic change may thus
rely on the complex processes of neurogenesis and synaptogenesis that occur in the context
of relationship.
These findings lend support to the Lewis et al. (2000) view that one person can aid
in restructuring the limbic brain of another, which they call limbic revision. This claim
can be summarized by their axiom that neural patterns established through interpersonal
relationship can only be revised through the milieu of interpersonal relating. The work of
psychotherapy is, at its core, a process of interpersonal limbic revision. Buber suggested
that learning and formation occur in the in-between of persons, that is, where persons inter-
sect through dialogue in all its forms (Kramer and Gawlick 2003). An I-It relationship is
characterized by one’s view of the other as object and as fixed in time and there to be acted
upon. To use the language of psychology, it is to see the other only through the lens of
our own preexisting cognitive schemas and the expectation that patterns experienced in
the past will be fulfilled in the present. Buber’s characterization of the I-Thou relation-
ship, in contrast, is premised on mutual subjectivity in which both individuals are dynamic
actors that bring life to the dialogue between them. I-Thou relating creates a fertile holding
place in which the processes of learning and formation take place. The actors move beyond
expectations based on preestablished schemas and instead see one another in the fullness of
their mutual humanity.
This space between I and thou is the fomenting source of limbic revision and healing.
When individuals experience one another as dynamic actors, fully embracing the human-
ness of the other, they are freed to relate in new ways. They are no longer tethered to previ-
ous dysfunctional patterns or schemata; instead, they are able to respond to one another in
each moment with genuine love and affirmation. This gives rise to a series of punctuated,
emotionally salient interactions that form the basis for limbic revision. These corrective
emotional experiences occur when thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that previously per-
petuated broken relationships are instead responded to with thoughts, feelings, and behav-
iors rooted in love (Teyber and McClure 2011). Over time, experiential stimuli previously
associated with fear or hurt—and thus a need for corresponding self-protection—become
neurologically linked with greater self-regulation (Tabibnia and Radecki 2018). Most cen-
tral to the development of healthy interpersonal relating is the process through which indi-
viduals become increasingly comfortable with the vulnerability necessary for emotional
intimacy (Lewis et al. 2000). Through the corrective emotional experiences of genuine
I-Thou relating, they learn that vulnerability and intimacy, rather than hurt and harm, are
conducive to deeper relationship.
Research on psychotherapy outcomes indicates that it is the therapeutic relationship,
much more so than the therapeutic approach or formalized techniques, that gives rise to the
change associated with corrective emotional experiences (Norcross 2011). Limbic revision
is thus premised on genuine relating rather than the leveraging of specific data or a particu-
lar psychological theory.
185	Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 7 of 13 --

1 3
Integration and the incarnational relational enactment
Efforts to integrate psychology and theology frequently focus on the layering of paral-
lel data. Our review of social theology and interpersonal psychology in this paper sug-
gests that relationship, rather than data, lies at the core of healing. The essence of what
it is to be Christian, therefore, is to take part in the kenotic community by embrac-
ing the relational presence of Christ. In like manner, the therapeutic relationship is one
manifestation of the kenotic community. Participation in the kenotic community of the
client-therapist relationship and the I-Thou relating that facilitates corrective emotional
experience are both contingent upon a humbling, genuine relationship without pretense
of power or hierarchical authority. From a Christian standpoint, this form of relating can
be understood most simply as an enactment of love made possible through the presence
of Christ.
Recognizing the relational presence of Christ at the core of both psychological and
theological healing allows for the use of a new term to describe the corrective emotional
experience. These therapeutic encounters only unfold within the real presence of Christ,
and the real presence of Christ can occur only within the context of human encounters
(Anderson 1990, pp. 186–187). We refer to these punctuated moments of heightened
emotional experiencing, fomented in and through the presence of Christ, as incarna-
tional relational enactment. Drawing together both social theology and interpersonal
psychology, we describe incarnational relational enactment as immediate, personal,
premised upon unconditional acceptance, and dialectical.
Immediacy refers to meeting in the here-and-now moment, a meeting that appre-
hends the full potential for transformation in each moment. Immediacy is the gateway to
attunement, critical moments in therapy when the therapist is completely in sync emo-
tionally, mentally, and spiritually with the client. It is also contingent upon the theologi-
cal assertion that revelation is not chronologically fixed but instead occurs in each new
moment through the spirit of Christ. This is the relational nature of revelation described
by Barth (1961). Through the resurrection, the incarnational presence of Christ tran-
scends the temporal specificity of 1 st -century Palestine (Anderson 1979). Christ is pre-
sent in the immediacy of each new moment of history. The spirit of Christ is thus pre-
sent in each new moment of therapy, perpetually inviting both therapist and client into
greater attunement with one another.
This attuned relating is also highly personal. Therapist and client are immersed in the
presence of Christ, who knows each individual down to the numbering of the hairs on their
head (Matthew 10:30). The relationship thus takes the form of an encounter in which both
participants seek to know and be known by the other. To be truly known by another is to
be seen not as a collection of expected behaviors or prior schemas but as a free and ful-
some individual. This is what Barth (2003) describes as “man’s free confrontation with
his fellow man” (p. 7) and what Tillich (1952) identifies as the “courage to affirm the self”
through encounter with another (p. 91). Understanding the unique personhood that con-
stitutes the other is necessary for accurate empathy and affirmation (Miller and Rollnick
2013) and client response specificity (Teyber and McClure 2011), all of which are instru-
mental in a corrective emotional experience. Knowing and being known is ultimately vital
to a healed existence because, as Anderson (1979) notes, “It offers each person... an actual
growth into the reality of his own personhood, which is the capacity to live in love” (p.
313). It is the reestablishment of a positive movement of being in relation to an other that
makes therapy therapeutic (Lee and Balswick 1989, p. 306).
186 Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 8 of 13 --

1 3
Incarnational relational enactment also moves beyond knowing into a state of uncon-
ditional acceptance. The very essence of incarnation is God’s continual embrace of the
flawed human condition. In therapy, this takes the form of each participant being received
into relationship by virtue of their common humanity with Christ, without any requisite
qualifying characteristics or actions (Anderson 1979). Incarnational relational enactment
allows the client to experience affective states that they have traditionally repressed because
of fear of punishment, rejection, abandonment, or being used. The great therapeutic act is
in allowing the client the paradox of feeling and expressing both love and hate toward the
therapist—to initiate feelings of a potentially killing rage, knowing that the therapist will
survive (Winnicott 1988). Again, this is not the therapist simply acting like Jesus; rather, it
is a yielding to and participation in the healing movement of Christ. The incarnational rela-
tional enactment thus allows the client to express the fullness of their personhood without
fear of rejection or dismissal, to experience loving relationship without qualifications or
conditions.
The unqualified love of Christ is held in perpetual tension with the simultaneous call to
repentance. God both accepts and reforms. These distinctive theological theses form two
poles of the dialectic in which we encounter the spirit of Christ. Growth and transforma-
tion, often described as the process of becoming, constitute the synthesis of these poles.
Through the incarnational relational enactment, this dialectic characterizes the therapeutic
process. The client is accepted as they are, free to enact their personhood without fear of
rejection. At the same time, the therapist draws on the intimacy of I-Thou relating to explic-
itly identify maladaptive patterns and formulate new, more adaptive responses (Teyber and
McClure 2011). When synthesized, this simultaneous acceptance and change allows for
therapeutic growth.
In the original Greek of the New Testament, such a transformation of the mind was
described as metanoia. Often written in modern English as repentance, the word more lit-
erally translates as a turning (meta) of the mind (noia). This metanoia is the telos of the
incarnational relational enactment, its ultimate purpose. Metanoia is the summation of the
neurogenesis and synaptogenesis that underlie limbic revision, which in turn changes the
effortful process of learning new ways of interacting with the self and with others into an
effortless process of being in relationship with others. It is a renewal of personhood, the
capacity to live in love (Anderson 1979), and a willingness to relate to another—and ulti-
mately to Christ—with intimacy and vulnerability.
Conclusion
Psychological and biblical truths provide context for integration, but the content of inte-
gration is the ground of being, Christ himself. Through Christ, the relational nature of the
divine is extended to humankind. The love extended by God through Christ is grounded in
self-emptying kenosis, and humankind is invited to live into this love through participation
in the kenotic community. The therapeutic relationship constitutes one manifestation of the
kenotic community, where Christ is made manifest in the midst of the caring relationship.
It is through the therapeutic dialogue that both client and therapist encounter God’s life-
altering love and healing.
The interpersonal process between therapist and client is optimally suited for attaining
therapeutic change because it leverages the relational nature of human neurology and psy-
chology. Both adaptive and maladaptive human development are formed in relationship.
187	Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 9 of 13 --

1 3
Therapeutic healing is thus premised on an improved capacity for relational functioning.
The client must undergo iterative corrective emotional experiences that allow for a pro-
cess of limbic revision. Experiential stimuli previously associated with fear and hurt are,
through genuine I-Thou relating, gradually paired with experiences of acceptance and self-
regulation. New neurons and synaptic connections are formed that ultimately sustain this
more adaptive relational framework.
This process of therapeutic change is made possible in and through the presence of
Christ and the manifestation of kenotic community. The presence of Christ in the midst of
therapy gives rise to moments of incarnational relational enactment. Each participant in the
therapeutic dialogue enters a state of heightened connectedness to self, other, and Christ. In
this heightened state of connecting, there is a focus on the immediate, here-and-now nature
of God’s relational revelation in each new moment. The attunement is also deeply personal,
allowing the client to grow into the fullness of their personhood. It is premised on uncon-
ditional, unqualified acceptance of the other and yet simultaneously calls for a process of
growth and change. The resulting dialectic is synthesized through limbic revision, resulting
in a literal renewing of the mind and leading to a new capacity to live in love.
References
Ables, T. (2013).&nbsp;Incarnational realism: Trinity and the Spirit in Augustine and Barth (Vol. 2). T & T
Clark Studies in Systematic Theology. London: Bloomsbury T & T Clark.
Acevedo, B. P., Aron, A., Fisher, H. E., & Brown, L. L. (2012). Neural correlates of long-term intense
romantic love. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 7(2), 145–159. https ://doi.org/10.1093/
scan/nsq09 2.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).
Washington: Author.
Anderson, R. (1979).&nbsp;Theological foundations for ministry: Selected readings for a theology of the
church in ministry. Edinburgh: Grand Rapids, MI: T. & T. Clark; Eerdmans.
Anderson, R. S. (1990). Christians who counsel. Pasadena: Fuller Seminary Press.
Apple, D. M., Fonseca, R. S., & Kokovay, E. (2017). The role of adult neurogenesis in psychiatric and cog-
nitive disorders. Brain Research, 1655, 270–276. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.brain res.2016.01.023.
Aupperle, R. L., Allard, C. B., Simmons, A. N., Flagan, T., Thorp, S. R., Norman, S. B., … & Stein, M. B.
(2013). Neural responses during emotional processing before and after cognitive trauma therapy for
battered women. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 214(1), 48–55. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.pscyc
hresn s.2013.05.001.
Barth, K. (1961). In H. Gollwitzer (Ed), Karl Barth’s church dogmatics (G. W. Bromiley, Trans.) (pp. 295–
333). Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark.
Barth, K. (2003). God Here and Now. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Benner, D. G. (2007). The incarnation as a metaphor for psychotherapy. In D. H. Stevenson, B. E. Eck, & P.
C. Hill (Eds.), Psychology and Christianity integration (pp. 247–252). Batavia: CAPS.
Buber, M. (1958). I and Thou. New York: Scribner.
Cisler, J. M., Sigel, B. A., Steele, J. S., Smitherman, S., Vanderzee, K., Pemberton, J., … & Kilts, C. D.
(2016). Changes in functional connectivity of the amygdala during cognitive reappraisal predict symp-
tom reduction during trauma-focused cognitive–behavioral therapy among adolescent girls with post-
traumatic stress disorder. Psychological Medicine, 46(14), 3013–3023. https ://doi.org/10.1017/S0033
29171 60018 47.
Cisler, J. M., Steele, J. S., Lenow, J. K., Smitherman, S., Everett, B., Messias, E., & Kilts, C. D. (2014).
Functional reorganization of neural networks during repeated exposure to the traumatic memory in
posttraumatic stress disorder: An exploratory fMRI study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 48(1),
47–55.
Farnsworth, K. (1985). Wholehearted integration: Harmonizing psychology and Christianity through word
and deed. Peabody: Baker Book House.
188 Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 10 of 13 --

1 3
Fellous, J., & Ledoux, J. E. (2005). Toward basic principles for emotional processing: What the fearful brain
tells the robot. Who needs emotions? The brain meets the robot (pp. 79–115). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. https ://doi.org/10.1093/acpro f:oso/97801 95166 194.003.0004.
Fishbane, M. D. (2007). Wired to connect: Neuroscience, relationships, and therapy. Family Process, 46,
395–412. https ://doi.org/10.1111/j.1545-5300,2007.00219 .x.
Gambrel, L. E., Faas, C., Kaestle, C. E., & Savla, J. (2016). Interpersonal neurobiology and couple relation-
ship quality: A longitudinal model. Contemporary Family Therapy: An International Journal, 38(3),
272–283. https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1059 1-016-9381-y.
Hayes, S. A., Hope, D. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2008). The pattern of subjective anxiety during in-session
exposures over the course of cognitive-behavioral therapy for clients with social anxiety. Behavior
Therapy, 39(3), 286–299. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2007.09.001.
Johnson, E. A. (1992). She who is: The mystery of God in feminist theological discourse. New York:
Crossroad.
Kim, P., Leckman, J. F., Mayes, L. C., Feldman, R., Wang, X., & Swain, J. E. (2010). The plasticity of
human maternal brain: Longitudinal changes in brain anatomy during the early postpartum period.
Behavioral Neuroscience, 124(5), 695–700. https ://doi.org/10.1037/a0020 884.
Kramer, K. P., & Gawlick, M. (2003). Martin Buber’s I and Thou: Practicing living dialogue. Mahwah:
Paulist Press.
Lambert, K. G. (2012). The parental brain: Transformations and adaptations. Physiology & Behavior,
107(5), 792–800. https ://doi.org/10.1016/j.physb eh.2012.03.018.
LeDoux, J. (1998). The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinnings of emotional life (1st Touchstone).
New York: Simon & Schuster.
LeDoux, J. (2002). Synaptic self: How our brains become who we are. New York: Viking.
Lee, C., & Balswick, J. (1989). Life in a glass house: The minister’s family in its unique social context.
Grand Rapids: Zondervan.
Lewis, T., Amini, F., & Lannon, R. (2000). A general theory of love (1st Vintage). New York: Vintage
Books.
Li, G., Nair, S. S., & Quirk, G. J. (2009). A biologically realistic network model of acquisition and extinc-
tion of conditioned fear associations in lateral amygdala neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 101(3),
1629–1646. https ://doi.org/10.1152/jn.90765 .2008.
Luby, J. L., Barch, D. M., Belden, A., Gaffrey, M. S., Tillman, R., Babb, C., … & Botteron, K. N. (2012).
Maternal support in early childhood predicts larger hippocampal volumes at school age. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(8), 2854–2859. https ://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.11180 03109 .
MacCulloch, D. (2010). Christianity: The first three thousand years (1st American). New York: Viking.
McLean, H. R., Bailey, H. N., & Lumley, M. N. (2014). The secure base script: Associated with early mala-
daptive schemas related to attachment. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Prac-
tice, 87(4), 425–446. https ://doi.org/10.1111/papt.12025 .
Miller, W., & Rollnick, S. (2013).&nbsp;Motivational interviewing: Helping people change&nbsp;(3rd ed.).
Applications of Motivational Interviewing. New York: Guilford Press.
Minagawa-Kawai, Y., Matsuoka, S., Dan, I., Naoi, N., Nakamura, K., & Kojima, S. (2009). Prefrontal acti-
vation associated with social attachment: Facial-emotion recognition in mothers and infants. Cerebral
Cortex, 19(2), 284–292. https ://doi.org/10.1093/cerco r/bhn08 1.
Norcross, J. C. (2011). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-based responsiveness (2nd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press. doi:https ://doi.org/10.1093/acpro f:oso/97801 99737 208.001.0001.
Parsons, C. E., Stark, E. A., Young, K. S., Stein, A., & Kringelbach, M. L. (2013). Understanding the human
parental brain: A critical role of the orbitofrontal cortex. Social Neuroscience, 8(6), 525–543. https ://
doi.org/10.1080/17470 919.2013.84261 0.
Schore, A. N. (2011). The science of the art of psychotherapy. New York: W. W. Norton.
Siegel, D. J. (2007). The mindful brain. New York: W. W. Norton.
Siegel, D. J., & Hartzell, M. (2003). Parenting from the inside out. New York: Penguin.
Simard, V., Moss, E., & Pascuzzo, K. (2011). Early maladaptive schemas and child and adult attachment:
A 15-year longitudinal study. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 84(4),
349–366. https ://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8341.2010.02009 .x.
Slipp, S. (1984). Object relations: A dynamic bridge between individual and family treatment. Northvale: J.
Aronson.
Stevenson, D., Eck, B. E., & Hill, P. C. (2007). Psychology and Christianity integration: Seminal works that
shaped the movement. Batavia: Christian Association for Psychological Studies.
Tabibnia, G., & Radecki, D. (2018). Resilience training that can change the brain. Consulting Psychology
Journal: Practice and Research, 70(1), 59–88. https ://doi.org/10.1037/cpb00 00110 .
189	Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 11 of 13 --

1 3
Teyber, E., & McClure, F. H. (2011). Interpersonal process in therapy: An integrative model (6th ed.). Bel-
mont: Brooks/Cole Cengage Learning.
Thoburn, J., & Sexton, T. L. (2016). Family psychology: Theory, research, and practice. Santa Barbara:
Praeger.
Tillich, P. (1952). The courage to be. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Torrance, A. (2000). The Trinity. In J. Webster (Ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Karl Barth (pp. 72–92).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Vaughn, B. E., Bost, K. K., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (2008). Attachment and temperament: Additive and
interactive influences on behavior, affect, and cognition during infancy and childhood. In J. Cassidy &
P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (pp. 192–
216). New York: Guilford Press.
Whisman, M. A., & Beach, S. H. (2013). Relationship distress: Assessment, definition, and implications for
mental health diagnosis. In H. M. Foran, S. H. Beach, A. S. Slep, R. E. Heyman, M. Z. Wamboldt, H.
M. Foran, . . . & M. Z. Wamboldt (Eds.),&nbsp;Family problems and family violence: Reliable assess-
ment and the ICD-11 (pp. 71–78). New York: Springer.
Whisman, M. A., & Uebelacker, L. A. (2003). Comorbidity of relationship distress and mental and physical
health problems. In D. K. Snyder & M. A. Whisman (Eds.), Treating difficult couples: Helping clients
with coexisting mental and relationship disorders (pp. 3–26). New York: Guilford Press.
Winnicott, D. W. (1988). Human nature. New York: Bruner Mazel.
Zimmer-Gembeck, M. J., Webb, H. J., Pepping, C. A., Swan, K., Merlo, O., Skinner, E. A., … & Dunbar,
M. (2017). Review: Is parent–child attachment a correlate of children’s emotion regulation and cop-
ing? International Journal of Behavioral Development, 41(1), 74–93.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.
190 Pastoral Psychology (2021) 70:179–190

-- 12 of 13 --

Pastoral Psychology is a copyright of Springer, 2021. All Rights Reserved.

-- 13 of 13 --

