Theology and Counseling
COUN 5773
Appendix A
Instructions for Vocational Spiritual Self-Narrative
10% of course grade
Who am I? Who am I in the present, and who have I been? Who am I in my social relations? Who am I in my vocational calling? Who am I in relationship to God (or my conception of ultimate reality)? Who am I as a person in my CMHC program as a next step in the journey of my calling in life? 
This assignment is completed through a written narrative, thus the task is to complete:
A 1000-1500 word narrative essay that a) is carefully composed with no or almost no writing errors; b) provides response to the above questions, though the structure of how this is done may vary; c) demonstrates self-understanding and respect for others; d) responds to some of the spiritual, theological, and philosophical notions found in Smith and other assigned course readings, along with other valuable sources at the writer’s discretion; and e) APA-formatted citations as necessary. 
This assignment addresses Course Learning Outcome 1: Compose a self-narrative which identifies religious, spiritual, and ethical self-understanding in relation to the vocation of mental health counseling (CACREP Standard 2b, 2d, and 2g).
Grading Rubric: 
Grading Area
A-range 
B-range 
C-range 
D- and F-range 
Followed Directions (10%) 
All directions are properly followed. 
Almost all directions are properly followed. 
Several lapses in following directions. 
Numerous lapses in following directions. 
Quality of Written Composition (10%) 
No or almost no errors in writing. Quality of writing is altogether appropriate to a course at the master’s level. 
Several writing errors or problems. Quality of writing is mostly appropriate to a course at the master’s level. 
A number of writing errors or problems in writing. Quality of writing includes lapses inappropriate to a course at the master’s level. 
Regular errors or problems in writing. Quality of writing has regular lapses inappropriate to a course at the master’s level.
 
APA Formatting (10%) 
Documentation is entirely or almost entirely in conformity with APA formatting and style. 
Documentation is mostly in conformity with APA formatting and style. 
Documentation has regular lapses in conformity with APA formatting and style. 
Documentation lacks conformity with APA formatting and style. 
Self-Narration and Storytelling 
(40%) 
Substantially narrates personal narrative in a manner that provides efficient and appropriate sharing of personal identity, relations, and vocation. 
Mostly provides substantial personal narrative in a manner that provides efficient and appropriate sharing of personal identity, relations, and vocation. 
Partially provides substantial personal narrative in a manner that provides efficient and appropriate sharing of personal identity, relations, and vocation. 
Provide little to no substantial personal narrative in a manner that provides efficient and appropriate sharing of personal identity, relations, and vocation. 
Self-Interpretation 
(30%) 
Constructs a mature self-interpretation of one’s personal identity and vocational understanding, even if in process. 
Constructs a mostly developed self-interpretation of one’s personal identity and vocational understanding, even if in process. 
Constructs a partially developed self-interpretation of one’s personal identity and vocational understanding, even if in process. 
Constructs a minimally developed self-interpretation of one’s personal identity and vocational understanding, even if in process. 