

-- 1 of 257 --

Christians
CWHO
ounsel

-- 2 of 257 --

The Ray S. Anderson Collection
Ray Sherman Anderson (1925–2009) worked the soil and tended the
animals of a South Dakota farm, planted and pastored a church in
Southern California, and completed a PhD degree in theology with
Thomas F. Torrance in New College Edinburgh. He began his pro-
fessional teaching career at Westmont College, and then taught and
served in various administrative capacities at Fuller Theological Semi-
nary for thirty-three years (retiring as Professor Emeritus of Theology
and Ministry). While teaching at Fuller, he served as a parish pastor,
always insisting that theology and ministry go hand-in-hand.
The pastoral theologian who began his teaching career in middle
age penned twenty-seven books. Like Karl Barth, Prof. Anderson ar-
ticulated a theology of and for the church based on God’s own ministry
of revelation and reconciliation in the world. As professor and pas-
tor, he modeled an incarnational, evangelical passion for the healing of
humanity by Jesus Christ, who is both God’s self-revelation to us and
the reconciliation of our broken humanity to the triune God. His gift
of relating suffering and alienated humans to Christ existing as com-
munity (Dietrich Bonhoeffer) is a recurrent motif throughout his life,
ministry, and works.
The Ray S. Anderson Collection comprises books by Ray Ander-
son, an introductory text to his theology by Christian D. Kettler, two
edited volumes that celebrate his distinguished academic career (Incar-
national Ministry: The Presence of Christ in Church, Society, and Family
and On Being Christian . . . and Human), and a reprint of an Edifica-
tion volume that focuses on Ray Anderson’s contributions to the field
of Christian Psychology. A word of gratitude is due to The Society of
Christian Psychology and its parent organization, The American As-
sociation for Christian Counselors, for their permission to make the
Edification issue available in book form. Jim Tedrick of Wipf and Stock
Publishers deserves a special word of thanks for publishing many of
Ray Anderson’s books and commissioning this collection of works to
continue his legacy.
Todd H. Speidell, General Editor

-- 3 of 257 --

RAYS.	ANDERSON
hristians
WHO
ounsel
The
Vocation
of Wholistic
Therapy
WIPF 	& STOCK • Eugene, 	Oregon

-- 4 of 257 --

Wipf and Stock Publishers
199 W 8th Ave, Suite 3
Eugene, OR 97401
Christians Who Counsel
The Vocation of Wholistic Therapy
By Anderson, Ray S. and Speidell, Todd H.
Copyright©1990 by Anderson, Ray S.
ISBN 13: 978-1-60899-975-0
Publication date 9/16/2010
Previously published by Zondervan, 1990

-- 5 of 257 --

Contents
Introduction
PART ONE: FOUNDATIONS 	FOR
CHRISTIAN COUNSELING
1. Integrative Counseling
2. Counseling the Whole Person
3. The Counselor as Growth Promoter
7
13
30
56
PART TWO: SPIRITUAL DYNAMICS IN COUNSELING
4. The Kingdom of God as Therapeutic Context 	81
5. The Grace of God as Therapeutic Intervention 	103
6. The Word of God as Empowerment for Change 	121
1. The Healing Praxis of Prayer 	136
PART THREE: 	COUNSELING 	IN A CHRISTIAN MODE
8. Counseling as a Christian Calling 	157
9. Counseling as Christian Ministry 	176
10. Counseling as a Professional Practice 	195
11. The Counselor as Moral Advocate 	214
12. Dynamics of Pastoral Care in Counseling Praxis 	232
Bibliography 	248
Index 	254

-- 6 of 257 --



-- 7 of 257 --

Introduction
Learning 	comes by 	listening, 	while 	listening 	is a 	skill
acquired through acknowledged ignorance. For twelve years I
have listened to and learned from students enrolled in doctoral
programs in clinical psychology at a theological seminary. As a
theologian with no formal training in psychology, but with
eleven years experience in pastoral counseling, I am keenly
interested in the role of the counselor and/or therapist from the
perspective of Christian theology and ministry.
Unlike many who write in this field, I will not attempt to
integrate of psychology and theology, though I am deeply
interested in such integrative approaches. I write primarily as a
theologian and offer this work as a contribution toward a
theological approach to wholistic therapy. My approach is from
·the perspective of the person who is growing toward a meaning-
ful and effective life with the self, others, and God.
Although my approach leaves me open to criticism from both
psychologists and pastors, I nonetheless advance a basic thesis
in this work. An effective therapeutic intervention is one in
which the client's motive power to grow is facilitated by the
counselor's perceived 	presence 	as a partner 	in the growth
process. This thesis is stated and developed in chapter 3. The
fundamental assumption underlying this thesis is that a theolog-
ical anthropology, or concept of the person, is the key to a
theological basis for integrative work as a Christian counselor
and therapist. My focus is therefore on the role of the person
who counsels, whether it be as a pastor, lay counselor, psycho-
therapist, or family therapist.
Next to the word therapy itself, perhaps the word counseling
is the most ambiguous in this entire discussion. I like the
definition of counseling provided by Roger Hurding in his
marvelous book, The Tree of Healing. Counseling, says Hurd-
ing, is "that activity which aims to help others in any or all
7

-- 8 of 257 --

8 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
aspects of their being within a caring relationship." 1 Those who
counsel may be placed on a continuum with some form of
pastoral care on one end 	and the most intensive 	level of
psychotherapy at the other. Christians who counsel will be
found at every point on this continuum. It is for them that this
book is written.
Nothing makes theologians more suspicious than the threat of
"'psychologizing" the gospel. Many talk of the "psychological
captivity" of pastoral care and even theological approaches to
therapy. "'The theologians sat at the feet of the psychiatric
Gamaliels and seemed to like it," writes Paul Pruyser.2 Eugene
Peterson is more dramatic but no less critical when he writes
concerning the effect of psychology on the parish minister:
"'Pastors have been herded into the temple shrines of psychiatry
•.. 	and return to their parishes thoroughly convinced of their
inferiority. "a
As both a theologian and a parish minister, I believe that if
there has been seduction by psychology, it was caused by the
lack of a compelling theology. Note that most of the books
written on the integration of theology and psychology have
come from the psychologists and therapists who sense this need.
Theologians have not been quick to respond, perhaps out of fear
of being enchanted by the wicked witch Psyche. I hope in this
book to calm the fears of pastors and theologians as well as
propose a basis for theological integration to those trained in the
behavioral sciences and therapy.-,
The book is divided into three parts. Part 1 establishes a
theory of counseling based on a model of personhood that is
integrative and wholistic. Part 2 examines the spiritual dynamics
in counseling, beginning with the nature of the kingdom of God
as therapeutic context, followed by chapters on the grace of God,
the Word of God, and prayer. Finally, part 3 explores the nature
of counseling as a calling, a ministry, and a profession and
concludes with two chapters on the moral advocacy of counsel-
ing and the dynamics of pastoral care in counseling praxis.
I offer this book more as a case statement for Christians who
counsel than as a final word on the task of integrating theology
and psychology. In testing these concepts, I have been encour-
aged by a great many students and counselors that this is, at
least, a viable approach. I believe that it is a Christian approach.
And I trust that, in its own way, this book will inspire those who

-- 9 of 257 --

INTRODUCTION 	9
have chosen to exercise their Christians calling by living within
the circle of other people's pain and perplexity. They will find
the Lord already there.
Notes
1. Roger Hurtling, The Tree of Healing: Psychological and Biblical
Foundations for Counseling and Pastoral Care (Grand Rapids: Zonder-
van, 1988), 26.
2. Paul 	Pruyser, 	The Minister as Diagnostician (Philadelphia:
Wesbninster, 1976), 23.
3. Eugene Peterson, Five Smooth Stones for Pastoral Work (Atlanta:
John Knox, 1980), 112-13.
4. From a growing list of books on integration, I mention just a few:
David G. Benner, ed., Christian Counseling and Psychotherapy
(Grand Rapids: Baker, 1987); Psychotherapy in Christian Perspective
(Grand Rapids: Baker, 1987); and Psychotherapy and the Spiritual
Quest (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1988).
John D. Carter and Bruce Narramore, The Integration of Psychology
and Theology: An Introduction (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1979).
Gary R. Collins, The Rebuilding of Psychology: An Integration of
Psychology and Christianity (Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House, 1977);
Christian Counseling-A 	Comprehensive Guide (Dallas: Word Books,
1988); and Psychology and Theology: Prospects for Integration (Nash-
ville: Abingdon, 1981).
C. Stephen Evans, Wisdom and Humanness in Psychology-Pros-
pects for a Christian Approach (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1989).
Kirk Farnsworth, Wholehearted Integration: Harmonizing Psychol-
ogy and Christianity Through Word and Deed (Grand Rapids: Baker,
1985).
J. R. Fleck and John D. Carter, eds., Psychology and Christianity:
Integration Readings (Nashville: Abingdon, 1981).
Stanton L. Jones, editor, Psychology and the Christian Faith-An
Introductory Reader (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1986).
Ronald 	L. Koteskey, Psychology from 	a Christian Perspective
(Nashville: Abingdon, 1980).
R. E. Larzelere, "The Task Ahead: Six Levels of Integration 	of
Christianity and Psychology," Journal of Psychology and Theology 8
(1980): 3-11.
Ronald P. Philipchalk, Psychology and Christianity: An Introduction
to Controversial Issues (Lanham, Md.: University Press of America,
1988).
Mary S. Van Leeuwen, The Sorcerer's Apprentice: A Christian Look
at the Changing Face of Psychology (Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity
Press, 1982).

-- 10 of 257 --



-- 11 of 257 --

PART ONE
FOUNDATIONS 	FOR
CHRISTIAN 	COUNSELING

-- 12 of 257 --



-- 13 of 257 --

1
Integrative 	Counseling
Dr. Johnson, I must say that you have helped me overcome my
compulsive behavior and ungodly temper in a way that I would
never have thought possible. I feel better about myself-I 	think
that I am a changed person! Even my husband says that I am so
much easier to live with. You have probably saved my marriage.
But tell me, doctor, I know that you are Christian and so am I. I
tried to change by reading the Bible and praying, but it never
worked. And one thing I noticed during our counseling times, you
never prayed with me or used the Bible to tell me how I should try
to be more like Christ. How is that you could help me when God
couldn't?
Sue Johnson, a successful Christian psychologist in private
practice, 	remembered 	this conversation 	with an uneasy con-
science. 	It didn't 	help 	her 	to think 	back on the 	cheerful
platitude she left with her client: "Well, Martha, God works in
mysterious ways, his wonders to perform!" At the time, she only
wanted to cover herself and dodge the issue. Later she had to
ask herself a troublesome and nagging question: Could she in
good conscience leave out God and still be doing God's work in
helping 	people?
The Uneasy Conscience of the Christian Therapist
The uneasy conscience! What Christian psychologists-or, 	for
that matter, pastors as well-don't 	have a twinge of conscience
when they find that a little transactional analysis once a week
13

-- 14 of 257 --

14 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
works better than a "month of Sundays" in curing the souls of
troubled parishioners? How is it that psychology comforts some
while prayer only seems to compound the pain? Why is it that
for some, faith falters when most needed and being "born again"
is more like "thirsting in a barren land" than having a "river of
life flowing through me"?
Being a Christian as well as a psychologist, Sue Johnson feels
assured of her salvation through Christ. She would say that her
life was transformed through coming to know God as Savior and
Lord of her life. She would insist that she believes 	in the
efficacy of both prayer and the Bible for her own life of faith and
growth as a Christian. And when pressed, she would say that she
believes 	that the Bible and Christian faith are resources for
emotional healing for others as well.
Being 	a trained 	and 	licensed 	psychologist 	as well 	as a
Christian, Sue enjoys a life vocation that offers a high degree of
fulfillment. She facilitates emotional healing, helps her clients
restore shattered 	self-worth, and mends broken relationships.
And she is good at it. Her clinical skills are professional and
personal. She is especially helpful to those who come to her
from the churches 	in the community, for they know of her
Christian faith and seem to feel more secure spilling out their
pain 	and 	confusion to one 	who shares their 	own ultimate
spiritual values. But she also knows that the real reason why
many come to her is that she is an effective counselor. She has
helped people change from being ineffective and emotionally
crippled persons into persons who can be reasonably happy
again, who can leave the past behind and begin to live life in a
fuller and richer way.
So why the uneasy conscience, Sue Johnson? Is it because,
behind the mask of professional competence, you yourself have
whispered 	your client's question, "How is it that I can help
people when God cannot?" Or, given your penchant for clinical
insight, is your question a more practical one, "Am I really
helping people in their faith life, or do I only provide psycholog-
ical healing so that they feel that they don't really need God?"
Suddenly the idea of Christian counseling can all fall apart.
Being a Christian and a psychologist seems a natural blend.
Both have the goal of helping persons. Both bring resources to
bear upon the total life of the person. One can be good at both!
But can one blend the two so as to encourage spiritual growth

-- 15 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVE COUNSELING 	15
through therapeutic 	techniques? 	Or, to put it the other way
around, can one facilitate emotional and mental health through
spiritual exercises of prayer, Bible reading, and faith? Either
way, the counselor may suffer an uneasy conscience!
Do some Christian psychologists, in an attempt to preserve
the integrity of a therapeutic 	relation and methodology, leave
"God talk" outside the clinical session and focus too narrowly
on psychological 	dynamics 	and 	therapeutic 	goals, ignoring
spiritual dynamics such as sin, forgiveness, grace, and prayer?
Many 	counselors 	believe 	that 	such 	spiritual 	concepts 	and
exercises should be left to pastoral care and not intrude into the
therapeutic hour. Others may assimilate spiritual practices into
the 	counseling 	relation 	in 	order 	to make their 	counseling
Christian, but then feel uneasy for practicing beyond the bounds
of their clinical training. The license to practice psychotherapy
is ordinarily 	issued 	by 	the 	secular 	state, 	not 	the 	church.
Moreover, the discipline of psychology tends to dislike theories
and practices that include phenomena beyond direct observa-
tion and control.
For the Christian who counsels, God may be thought of as the
great healer, especially in matters of the soul. Accordingly, one
ought to suppose that God and his grace are sufficient without
the aid of "secular" 	devices such as clinical psychology.
Pastor Ken Jones once thought that way, but is no longer so
sure. While comparing notes with Sue Johnson, he confessed, "I
have a similar problem, but from the other side. My professor of
pastoral care warned me against the danger of 'psychologizing'
the emotional 	problems 	of Christians 	who come to me for
counseling. As a result, I offered biblical precepts and spiritual
counsel, only to find that people who came to me for help began
to feel guilty for not being able to manage their emotions more
effectively. 	Since 	attending 	a 	seminar 	led 	by 	a 	Christian
psychologist and reading some recent books that suggest more
effective ways of helping troubled persons manage their emo-
tions, I see people healed and helped more effectively. But I
have an uneasy conscience about using all of this psychology!"
Do some pastors who counsel, anxious to relieve 	distress
which their preaching and spiritual counsel fail to alleviate, turn
too quickly to psychological means and so betray spiritual ends?
Many are unsure and so exclude these means in order to do
"biblical" 	or "spiritual" 	counseling. 	Others 	may assimilate

-- 16 of 257 --

16 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
psychological theories and methods into pastoral care with good
results, but with uneasy consciences. They struggle with the
nagging feeling that they have had to resort to secular means in
order to produce therapeutic 	results.
What are counselors who wish to integrate psychology and
Christian faith to do? Can feelings and faith be touched with the
same therapeutic insight? Does a Christian counselor need two
sets of lenses, one through which to view the sinful heart and
another to peer into the sickness of the soul? Or is there, as some
suggest, a Christian psychology that understands the mystery of
the 	human 	psyche 	better 	than 	ordinary 	psychologists 	and
facilitates personal spiritual growth more effectively than the
average pastoral counselor? Where are we to look for answers?
Sue Johnson says that she is a Christian and a psychologist.
She knows nothing of a "Christian psychology," yet she is sure
that in facilitating emotional healing and growth she is helping
people experience more fully and effectively what the Bible
calls the "fruit of the Spirit." But she has an uneasy conscience.
She would like to have a better 	sense of integration as she
practices therapy as a fulfillment of her calling as a Christian.
She would like to understand 	her role as a therapist as one
providing integrated counseling. She desires more than any-
thing to take off the "bifocal" lens when she looks into the faces
of her clients. She wants to believe that her clients are whole
persons by nature before they become fractured persons through
patterns of pathology. She wants a model of personhood that
integrates 	faith 	and 	psychology 	and 	that 	realizes 	the 	full
potential of each person. She needs help.
Ken Jones feels responsible for the spiritual well-being of all
who come under his pastoral care. He knows well the pervasive
power of sin and believes strongly in the healing power of grace,
the Word of God, and prayer. He also knows that Sue Johnson
and many Christian psychologists like her provide effective
therapeutic 	intervention 	and 	become 	catalysts for personal
growth and wholeness for their patients beyond that which a
pastor can do. But he is not happy with the dichotomy that he
senses between the psychological and the spiritual. He wants to
feel that those who seek God's 	grace can find relief 	from
psychological pain and emotional trauma as well as assurance of
divine forgiveness. He too needs a model of personhood that
integrates 	the spiritual and the psychological, a model that

-- 17 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVECOUNSELING 	17
respects the role of Christian therapists who also help persons to
experience wholeness. He needs help.
And so this book is written for both Sue and Ken and for all
Christians who counsel. We all need a better, more integrated
vision of what it is to be human, of how to live more effectively
in relationships, and above all, of what it is to be open to the
spiritual resources of God's grace and love.
Integrative Competence
The core of this chapter can be stated as a thesis: Before there
can be competence in counseling, we must understand compe-
tence in being human, in living humanly, openly, and lovingly
with others and with God. This competence in being human
involves more than "getting our own act together," to use a
contemporary 	expression. 	The 	self, when 	alone, eventually
aches with solitariness, even when God is present! Adam moved
from solitariness to society when he cried out, "This at last is
bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh" (Gen. 2:23). He could
not say this of God or of the animals. In the differences of bone
with bone and flesh with flesh lies the mystery of the human
form.
This was the primal movement of integration. Adam and Eve
recognized themselves as humans in this grace-filled and loving
encounter. In their differences, each experienced a wholeness
and unity of being. God was present, and they experienced him
in the joy of their own unity of being. In this way the human self
was integrated as personal, social, and spiritual being.
When disintegration occurred, these differences became divi-
sions, 	sown in mistrust 	and 	unbelief. 	The 	self withdraws
instinctively from God and from the other, though a pretense of
relation with both is maintained, one in the form of religious or
anti-religious armor, and the other in the form of social or anti-
social sanity and safety. The way back to authentic humanity is
through a personal encounter 	in which the grace of God is
experienced 	as an integrative 	core, opening 	the 	emotional,
social, and spiritual aspects of the self to new dimensions of life.
This "rebirth" 	is itself a return to our core humanity and is
essentially a therapeutic recovery of personhood as a personal,
social, and spiritual "gestalt."
This "gestalt" may be defined as the total configuration or

-- 18 of 257 --

18 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
pattern of a life. A person's 	gestalt emerges in the historical
process by which a person forms his or her own life pattern in
relation to the environment. 	This environment 	is social and
spiritual as well as physical. I am using the term gestalt in the
broadest sense, not in the technical 	sense as used by some
psychological theorists. 1 It is to become, as it were, a "child"
again and so placed upon the very threshold of the kingdom of
God. This is one way of understanding 	the language of Jesus,
who spoke of being born "from above" or "a second time" Oohn
3:3) and who also placed a child in the midst of his disciples
saying, "unless you tum and become like children, you will
never enter the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. 18:3). Here we have
the beginning of a core paradigm for personhood as a model for
integrated competence.
Humans instinctively reach out for a transcendent reality-a
reality that they can experience and a reality that integrates the
self. But those who receive the gift of faith, who are spiritually
reborn and become children of God, must also come to terms
with the reality of human existence. Those who claim the gift of
faith but deny their humanity or fail to experience it fully cannot
experience their human wholeness, despite fanatical excesses of
spirituality. Human life demands integrative living. It requires
integrative competence. 	Let us examine this more closely.
The integration of the self as a healthy human believer is a
goal worthy of the deepest aspirations of the spirit. Integration
requires change and growth as we learn to hear, respond to, and
believe the divine Word, wherever it encounters 	us.
For us to develop into the image of God we must be persons
in families, communities, 	and culture. 	Adam as the 	solitary
human creature received the divine verdict "not good" (Gen.
2:18). This original "dysfunction" preceded any concept of sin
or pathology. The first human did not have the competence to
begin, much less complete, the task of being human. Only when
Adam could relate to himself through the other, Eve, was he
"good" and on his way to becoming a complete human being.
The original dysfunction and despair of solitariness were healed
by the fellow human, not by God alone!
The astonishing and astounding fact is this: Humanity is by its
very nature therapeutic. Healing is grounded in humanity, not
in the removal of pathology. To put it another way, being human
requires openness to the other and permission for the other to

-- 19 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVECOUNSELING 	19
touch the core of our being. Adam expressed it in amazingly
concrete tenns as "bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh." This
"helping and healing" encounter integrates the self with itself
as well as with the other as necessary to one's selfhood. All
subsequent 	therapy, 	whether 	physical, 	psychical, 	social, or
spiritual, is grounded in this core therapy of being human.
My concern in this chapter is to lay a foundation for the rest of
the book. The focal point for integration is not the counselor,
whether 	pastor or professional therapist, 	nor is it merely a
concept or theory. The integration of our personal, social, and
spiritual beings lies at the very core of personhood itself.
People are by nature integrative, for we are composite and not
simple in nature. As persons we are "composed" in the sense of
having a gestalt, or "structure," 	that includes but entails more
than the mere assemblage of components. As an artist or a
photographer 	might 	"compose" 	a painting 	or a picture, 	so
persons are composite in the same dynamic and creative sense.
Being human is itself a creative tension that relates the self to
its embodied 	state and the embodied self to others. The self
must be integrative in order to be a human self. That is, the self
must 	exist 	with 	and 	for others 	intentionally, 	openly, 	and
therapeutically-for 	the good of the other. In addition, human
persons are by nature integrative because growth forces the
gestalt of the embodied self to be open to change as significant
others, including God, impinge upon the self. Human selfhood
must 	continually 	"recompose" 	itself 	through 	a process 	of
change. This process is called growth.
Growth also is a fundamental therapeutic process in which
therapy 	means 	growth rather 	than 	removal of pain 	or the
overcoming of dysfunction. In this sense, "conversion" 	in a
spiritual or theological sense is not only a one-time thing, but
also an ongoing process of change and growth. We need the
ongoing conversion process of development and growth because
we are becoming integrative humans through our relationships
with others and God. When something disrupts this process, it
can be called sin, because it produces spiritual blockage as well
as personal and social alienation.
All dysfunction or even disorder of personhood is disintegra-
tive, destroying the fundamental competence of the human to
function integratively. The integrative core of the person can
thus be depicted 	as threefold:

-- 20 of 257 --

20 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
1. There is integration as embodied soul, where the self forms a
"gestalt" in which the physical and mental aspects of person-
hood are connected as a living whole. Dysfunction and disorder
at this level of integration may take on psychosomatic forms as
well as loss of self-esteem and a sense of despair and doom.
2. There is integration as related self, where the self and others
are differentiated within a unity of being-so 	as to be spoken of
as being "one flesh" (Gen 2:24). Dysfunction and disorder at
this level may reflect problems both with interpersonal rela-
tionships and with self-defeating anxieties and fears.
3. There is integration as spiritual self, where God is the source of
the human spirit Dysfunction and disorder at this level may
take the form of preoccupation with guilt and depression, with
symptoms manifest through each of the other two areas.
This threefold integrative task can be seen as a developmental
trajectory of the life of the self experienced as the image of God.
On this trajectory of personal growth, competence is relative to
the stage of development. 	A psychosomatic competence 	(first
level) enables the self and the embodied self to form a healthy
gestalt very early in life. A person who experiences integration
at this level will express a healthy and realistic sense of his or
her body: "I feel good about my body. I am comfortable with
being male/female and with my sexual feelings. I'm glad to be
alive and living in this world, even with all its limitations and
frustrations."
A psychosocial competence 	(second level) is learned 	later.
Love becomes integrated with the gestalt of the self in the form
of promise, trust, fidelity, and community. Such a person will
express feelings and actions of openness toward others while
retaining 	a strong sense 	of personal 	identity: 	"My friends
(family) like me for who I am. We sometimes disagree and even
fight, but the bond between 	us grows even stronger. I look
forward to forming new relationships while I discover the value
of present 	and former relationships 	to my life."
The competence of the psychospiritual (third) level of the self
as 	orientation 	toward 	God, 	others, 	and 	the 	self 	indicates
maturity. Persons who have developed 	this competence 	will
often be unable to account for their deep faith in God, despite
challenges, losses, and even tragedy: "I feel that God is faithful
and that he understands, even when I fail or do not understand.

-- 21 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVE COUNSELING 	21
I experience the love and reality of God through others, even as
I am sometimes the source of God's love and grace for them."
This brief sketch of the nature of human personhood 	as
personal, social, and spiritual will be developed more fully in
the next chapter. It is set forth here as a core paradigm, or
model, to show the basis for an integrative approach to counsel-
ing.
This integrative structure of human life demands a compe-
tence that must be acquired 	through growth. It is on this
trajectory of growth that competence can be measured in the
threefold sense presented 	above. Competence 	in any of the
three areas-personal, 	social, or spiritual-at 	the expense of the
other two destroys the self.
Sometimes a person can mask his or her failure in one area
through developing particular skills in another area. For exam-
ple, an extreme extrovert may relate competently at the interper-
sonal level, but be an utter failure at the intrapersonal level.
S9JrenKierkegaard once wrote in his journals, "I just returned
from a party of which I was the life and soul; wit poured from
my lips, everyone laughed and admired me-but 	I went away-
and the dash should be as long as the earth's orbit--and
wanted to shoot inyself."2 On the other hand, Adam before the
creation of Eve could well have developed 	skills in private
meditation and worship of God, as well as competence 	in
husbandry of the soil and the animals. Yet God decreed that he
was incomplete at the level of co-humanity, and no degree of
competence 	in 	the 	other 	areas could 	compensate 	for this
deficiency.
Being a person is a matter of growing into this integrative
competence. It is essentially a therapeutic process in which the
best form of therapy is being and becoming human in this
threefold sense. But we often need help, for the way of growth is
precarious, if not treacherous. The patterns of pathology are
woven into the fabric of the very humanity that gives us the
vision and hope of our own selfhood. And the ones with whom
we most often relate are often the ones most caught up in our
own patterns of pathology and dysfunction. Adam and Eve had
each other, even in their state of mistrust, betrayal, and unbelief.
They remained human, but the therapeutic 	bond had been
broken, and so their humanity needed healing. Enter God the
therapist! And if metaphors mean anything, we can read a depth

-- 22 of 257 --

22 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
of comfort and hope in the statement, "The Lono God made for
Adam and for his wife garments of skins, and clothed 	them"
(Gen. 3:21).
But as Sue Johnson 	would put it, seeing that God doesn't
make house calls any more, I am supposed to be the next best!
But who is really "competent 	to counsel" 	in this integrative
way?a
Counseling on the Therapeutic Continuum
The trajectory of being and becoming 	human 	as described
above suggests a therapeutic 	continuum on which various levels
of therapeutic 	enablement 	with appropriate 	skills can be plot-
ted. The very nature of our humanity is therapeutic 	in that we
give access to each other and provide care for one another in the
simplest 	and most routine 	experiences 	of living together. 	All
Christians can and do counsel in their own way. Within every
Christian 	fellowship 	there 	are many who can gain additional
expertise in counseling and serve as "lay counselors" alongside
of and 	in 	support 	of "pastor 	counselors" 	and 	professional
psychologists 	and therapists.
The therapeutic 	continuum includes those who are open and
relatively 	healthy 	persons 	ministering 	care 	and providing 	a
context of growth for each other. Certain levels of competence
come from experience 	and are passed 	on from generation 	to
generation 	through 	the 	rituals 	and 	traditions 	of family and
community. 	Often 	persons 	assume 	particular 	roles 	in 	this
therapeutic 	context, 	being 	parents, 	teachers, 	or 	significant
others. Some persons are healed through the pastoral or priestly
role of creating 	and ministering 	the symbols that enable 	the
ordinary to be touched and inspired by the extraordinary. But in
all these ways and roles, the integrative life and power of God
are mediated and experienced. 	The pastors and priests may use
symbols and metaphors, 	while the professional caregivers 	use
therapeutic means and methods. Nonprofessional caregivers use
wisdom, develop listening 	skills, and provide supportive 	pres-
ence 	and 	encouragement. 	Domestic 	caregivers 	use 	human
hands and perform personal actions. But all alike touch the life
of persons 	in such a way that God becomes 	real.
While the concept of "counseling" 	seems a relatively modern
phenomenon, 	with its own theoretical 	and professional 	disci-

-- 23 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVECOUNSELING 	23
pline 	and practice, the 	practice of caregiving is as old as
humanity itself. Roger Hurding suggests in The Tree of Healing
that the "tree of pastoral care" is sunk deep into the soil of
human experience where God's ministry and calling of extend-
ing mercy, love, and forgiveness are as ancient as the story of
humanity itself.• Indeed, the concept of pastoral care, though
construed as the ministry of the pastoral leaders of the church to
its members, is the Christian church's way of recognizing the
basic needs of humanity as foundational to the ministry of God's
grace and love. In Pastoral Care in Historical Perspective,
Clebsch and Jaekle define this ministry broadly in this way:
The ministry of the cure of souls, or pastoral care, consists of
helping acts, done by representative Christian persons, directed
toward the healing, sustaining, guiding, and reconciling of trou-
bled persons whose troubles arise in the context of ultimate
meanings and concerns.5
With this concept of pastoral care, we are clearly moving along
the therapeutic continuum to the place where caregiving goes
beyond the ordinary therapy of encouraging growth through the
structures, rituals, and traditions 	of family and community.
Many who are reading this book will find themselves in this
category of therapy, whether as ordained clergy or as layperson.
As Christians who counsel, we will be expected to have a level
of competence 	that goes beyond the ordinary. However, we will
be participating in and assisting others in the same integrative
task as described above.
The task of integration does not emerge with the degree of
therapeutic 	competence required or with the presentation of
"troubled persons" for special forms of therapy. As we have
seen, integration is grounded in the very nature of personhood.
A Christian who provides counseling, either through pastoral
care in the church or through professional therapy in a clinic or
private practice, ought to be competent in the integrative task of
being 	and 	becoming 	human. 	"Troubled 	persons" 	are 	the
primary texts for integration to be read and interpreted by the
counselor, who will then design methods and strategies for
caregiving. The clinical therapeutic method they will use is an
intentional 	form of caregiving designed 	to help 	the 	client
become competent in the integrative task of being and becom-
ing human.

-- 24 of 257 --

24 	CHRISTIANS WHO COlNSEL
Integration as a task for Christians who counsel demands a
multilevel competence of the counselor. Counselors must help
their clients find therapeutic relief and enable their growth by
working competently in the three integrational levels: integra-
tion as embodied 	self in a total "gestalt" 	of the lived life;
integration as related 	self in "grace-filled" encounters 	with
others; and integration as competence in living openly before
God, with others, and with self in a wholistic and realistic life of
faith.
When Sue Johnson feels uneasy and ambivalent about having
helped her client recover a sense of her self-worth without
direct use of spiritual resources such as prayer and the Bible,
she is expressing some lack of multilevel competence. For her,
integration remains stuck at the level of theory. She is compe-
tent in using clinical strategies to promote personal growth and
healing for her client. But "God talk" has not been integrated
into her therapeutic strategy at the conceptual level. She feels
that this is where she needs integration in order to satisfy her
conscience as to being a Christian psychologist.
But if she feels uneasy, it is probably because she feels that
she might have "failed" to integrate her own Christian faith into
her therapeutic practice. Her client expresses significant inte-
grative growth at the level of her humanity, but she does not
perceive it as an effect produced by the Spirit of God. What Dr.
Johnson may need more than a conceptual scheme of integration
between psychology and Christian faith is a biblical paradigm of
the person 	as an integrative gestalt. She has accepted 	the
theological dogma that human persons are created in the image
of God and that saving grace through Jesus Christ restores that
image. She believes that one becomes a child of God through
grace alone, by faith. However, her church has not helped her to
see that the image of God is actually a gestalt of selfhood
experienced in healthy relationships. In addition, her psycho-
logical training in personality theory and therapeutic techniques
did not provide a paradigm of the person as an integrative
process in which the spiritual and the emotional constitute the
gestalt of selfhood.
For Pastor Ken Jones, the theological training received at
seminary probably covered the area of human nature under the
category of sin, with little attention given to the psychological
and 	social aspects 	of the 	divine 	image as constitutive 	of

-- 25 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVE COUNSELING 	25
personhood. His recent appropriation of psychological perspec-
tives and therapeutic 	skills lacks theoretical 	grounding 	in a
biblical anthropology.
It is to meet the needs of people like Sue and Ken that this
book was written. 	From a theological perspective, 	a biblical
anthropology will be developed as a core paradigm for integra-
tive counseling as a ministry for Christians, a ministry that may
be pursued 	through a variety of modes.
Counseling as a Form of Christian Ministry
Christians 	who counsel 	minister 	human 	hope 	as well 	as
psychic healing. Some of us will counsel as laypersons, some as
a form of pastoral care, others in a more specialized 	role as
psychologists or family therapists. While we will devote a later
chapter to the professional role of a counselor, we need to state
here that certification as a_therapist should be the minimal kind
of qualification, not the maximum.
The 	professional 	practice 	of therapy, 	as with 	any 	other
profession, can be done in a way that is less than human and not
necessarily Christian. Psychologists are human, of course, and
many have deep 	religious commitments. 	Yet Christians who
counsel as psychologists or psychotherapists can bring a special
expertise. 	The psychologists 	who bring about a healing and
growing encounter that is fully human and that releases faith are
practicing a form of ministry-they 	are being Christian where it
really counts.
Christians who counsel have a ministry that goes beyond the
demand that theology be integrated 	with psychology, or that
psychology be integrated with theology. While that is a valuable
task, it is not my primary concern in this book. My concern is to
show that integration is focused most acutely on the role of the
person as well as the competence of the person who counsels as
a Christian. This means having a special expertise in helping
persons grow more effectively in the life of faith, and spiritual
persons 	more 	effectively 	into 	whole 	persons. 	Treating 	the
integration of theology and psychology merely as a theory can
lead to an approach that confuses and compromises the disci-
plines of each. Even when the theory seems to succeed, it tends
to produce a mythical creature that never becomes real outside
of academia, where integration is the avant-garde of the new

-- 26 of 257 --

26 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
curriculum. Our concern is more for "embodied integration," as
Kirk Farnsworth presents it in his book Wholehearted I ntegra-
tion: Harmonizing Psychology and Christianity Through Word
and Deed.&
The real subject of integration, then, is not a synthetic product
offered as an academic exercise. The subject of integration is the
Christian who helps others to heal and believe. Such a person
applies psychological and therapeutic 	techniques 	as a form of
Christian ministry.
For those who commonly associate the word minister only
with those ordained in the church, I beg their indulgence 	in
using the word in a much more general and less clerical way. I
use the word ministry in this context to speak of that role which
belongs to every Christian person-that 	of representing 	Jesus
Christ through word or act. It is into this "ministry" that the
particular 	skills and competencies 	of a psychologist can be
integrated. 	The 	concept 	of ministry 	is discussed 	at greater
length in chapter 9.
My assumption is that every Christian is a kind of minister of
growth and healing 	to other persons. 	This is a ministry 	of
sharing that empowers persons to experience the reality of the
kingdom of God as a community of hope and promise. It is a
calling inherent in the gift of faith. It is the ministry of growing
in faith as whole persons, and thus faith development is itself a
ministry that reaches out to others.
Some undertake 	this calling as nonprofessionals through a
variety of forms of lay counseling. Others find their calling in
professional roles. For some of us, integrating therapeutic skills
with Christian ministry demands a special sort of curriculum.
This curriculum will study the nature of the person and God's
revelation in Scripture. It will emphasize personal growth as a
psycho-spiritual individual so that the student will develop as a
healthy person and a believing Christian. And it will enable the
student to produce therapeutic gain and personal growth in the
lives of others. The person who has this knowledge, along with
continued personal development 	and clinical skills, will have
integrated faith and psychology.
This book attempts to define and demonstrate this particular
kind of integration. This integration has a fundamental assump-
tion: the goals and techniques of psychological counseling are
critically determined and effectively applied when the counsel-

-- 27 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVE COUNSELING 	27
ing practice is understood to be directed toward the lived life of
the whole person and as a function of the ministry of a Christian.
I will not judge 	any psychotherapeutic 	technique 	to be
inappropriate or unusable merely because it is a therapeutic
technique 	or a theory 	of human 	behavior. 	No therapeutic
technique is inherently more or less Christian; techniques that
seek to move persons toward more authentic experience of their
humanity are to be judged by that criterion. No technique that
relates essentially to the human psyche alone can satisfy the
need of a person for wholeness as a psycho-spiritual reality. The
Christian counselor can freely select appropriate techniques
from the wide range available, even as a Christian doctor can
make appropriate use of the expanding range of techniques and
medical treatments now available.
Summary
In this chapter we have probed the uneasy conscience of the
Christian therapist, discovering that the integration of Christian
faith as a resource for counseling tends to fall apart in practice.
Attempts at integration for the sake of the conscience of the
Christian counselor create ambivalence and frustration. What is
lacking is a model of personhood that provides an integrative
"gestalt" toward which the counselor can direct therapeutic
strategies.
We proceeded to develop a model for integrative competence
that includes a threefold "composite" of personhood for under-
standing the image of God in a developmental way. Each human
being seeks integration as embodied soul, as related self, and as
spirit-directed life toward God. This model describes a trajec-
tory of growth that passes through the context of social, family,
and community life for each person.
A therapeutic continuum was described based on this integra-
tive process of human growth and development, in which the
core human relationship of self to embodied self, related self,
and spirit-directed self constitutes a therapeutic bond. Specific
therapeutic 	strategies 	seeking to overcome dysfunction and
facilitate growth were shown to be related to this core therapeu-
tic human process, with appropriate competence required at
each level.
Finally, we suggested that counseling is a ministry to persons

-- 28 of 257 --

28 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
with whom God is working to complete the divine image and
likeness. Integrative counseling is counseling the whole person.
Every person is a text to be understood 	and interpreted 	in
accordance with God's purpose and design. To this we give our
attention in the next chapter.
Notes
1. Gestalt psychology, pioneered 	by Frederick (Fritz) and Laura
Perls, is based on the German word gestalt, which is difficult to
translate into English. It has the connotation of configuration, structure,
theme, or organized whole. See their Gestalt Approach and Eye
Witness to Therapy (New York: Bantam, 1976). My use of the term in
this context is not based on gestalt psychology as such. I am using it
more in the sense used by the theologian Jurgen Moltmann, who
describes the gestalt of a person as "the whole human organism-that
historical Gestalt which people, 	body and soul, develop 	in their
environment .... 	In acquiring Gestalt, the person acquires both indivi-
duality and sociality; for the Gestalt binds him and his environment
into a living unity, and at the same time distinguishes him from that
environment 	as this particular living thing. Gestalt is the form of
exchange with the various environments in which a person is iden-
tifiable, and with which he can identify himself. ... 	Consequently, in
the lived Gestalt of a human being, body and soul, the conscious and
the unconscious, what is voluntary and what is involuntary, interpene-
trate" (God in Creation: A New Theology of Creation and the Spirit of
God [San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1985], 159-61).
2. Sf1ren Kierkegaard, The Journal of Kierkegaard, trans. and ed.
Alexander Dru (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1958), 50-51.
3. This is a sly reference to the title of the book by Jay Adams,
Competent to Counsel (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1970). I shall have more
to say about Adams's approach in the next chapter.
4. Roger Hurtling, The Tree of Healing: Psychological and Biblical
Foundations for Counseling and Pastoral Care (Grand Rapids: Zonder-
van, 1988), 15-16.
5. William A. Clebsch and Charles R. Jaekle, Pastoral Care in
Historical Perspective (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964), 4.
Emphasis is in the original.
6. Kirk E. Farnsworth, Wholehearted Integration (Grand Rapids:
Baker, 1986). Farnsworth 	distinguishes 	embodied 	integration 	from
critical integration 	as follows. Critical 	integration 	focuses on the
assumptions that underlie research methodologies, which makes it a
more philosophical orientation. Critical integration looks for specific
psychological conclusions that are incompatible with a more general
Christian worldview. 	Embodied 	integration, 	by contrast, looks for

-- 29 of 257 --

INTEGRATIVE COUNSELING 	29
specific psychological and theological conclusions that are comparable
with each other. 	Embodied 	integration 	focuses as much 	on the
concreteness 	of psychological and Christian living as on Christian
thinking; it connects both psychology and theology with the real world
(91-93). My own focus, as will become clear in the next chapter, is not
so much on the project of integration between psychology and theology
itself as on a foundational anthropology that is developed theologically
as the basis for an approach to counseling from a Christian perspective.
I expect that those who do not share this view of a Christian
anthropology will not feel that there is much integration.

-- 30 of 257 --

2
Counseling 	the
Whole 	Person
"I am not dying of AIDS; I am living with AIDS," protested
Andrew, who was being interviewed for a news feature on the
effects of the disease. Statistically his distinction was not very
significant. Of twenty acquaintances who were diagnosed with
the disease one year ago, only six were still living.
Why did Andrew cling stubbornly to a perspective of living
with an incurable disease as opposed to dying from it? Is he
permitted this illusion simply for the sake of preserving his
personal dignity and emotional stability? Will his attitude affect
the inevitable outcome of the sickness? Will he buy more time
through this "therapeutic" 	redefinition of his situation?
He was unable to answer these questions. Nor can anyone
else, for no one has yet explicated the mysterious connection
between 	the 	mental 	and 	the 	physical 	so as to predict 	or
manipulate the outcome with any degree of certainty. Will he
succeed in defying the statistics of this fatal disease? Maybe.
Some do, most do not. But this did not seem to be his point. He
had, as we suggested, therapeutically 	redefined his situation,
not in defiance of the facts, but in defiance of a logic that made
him merely a victim.
The fact of his disease did not in his view make him a mere
statistic. He saw his life as a structure of reality over which he
retained control by integrating one factor-his 	sickness-into
the whole. He refused to think of himself as a diseased person.
He was a person with a disease, perhaps even a life-threatening
disease. But he retained "script rights" over the story of his life!
30

-- 31 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	31
From a medical perspective, there may well be therapeutic
gains resulting from his positive attitude. Again, there may be
none. But the potential therapeutic gains grew out of the goals
that he set out to define and reach as a living and value-creating
person.
Andrew can use support and counseling as he struggles to
keep his life integrative and whole. Instinctively he maintains
that he is still an intact, whole person. He does not deny that he
has the dread disease, but he chooses to think of himself as a
living person rather than a dying patient. Yet he will also be
tormented by terror, and he will live with the demons of doubt
and despair. It will require tremendous resources of psychic
energy and sustained hope to fuel his faith and provide the
power that holds body and soul together. He may face loss of
body functions, feelings of shame and guilt, and rejection from
others who fear to touch or even be with him. He will need to
redefine these experiences therapeutically in order to maintain
this wholistic view of life. If he seeks a counselor, he will need
one as "whole" as he is, one who will tap his resources and
continue his integrative process even as his body deteriorates.
Unlike Andrew, those who have not succeeded in reinterpret-
ing their lives will need more than supportive counseling. They
will require extraordinary therapeutic insight and skill. How
does one enable another to overcome that sense of shame and
outrage resulting from senseless attacks upon the core of self?
Surely those who counsel need encouragement and empower-
ment in order to lead troubled persons to a wholistic and healthy
view of their lives.
Such understanding and insight is what we hope to provide in
this chapter. Christians who counsel must counsel the whole
person, especially when that person experiences dysfunction in
any aspect of life. In the previous chapter we stressed the point
that healing 	is grounded 	in the 	integrative 	powers of our
personal humanity, not in the removal of pathology. Andrew has
little chance of recovering from AIDS as a physical disease. But
the integrative powers of his core humanity are responding to an
internal drive toward wholeness as well as to the love and
support of others. The purpose of this chapter is to look more
closely at components that comprise the integrative core of
personal humanity. There is a mental and physical aspect to
each person's life, but the integrative core lies between them as

-- 32 of 257 --

32 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
a development of the self in its total ..gestalt," or form of life as
personal, social, and spiritual being.
The development of this integrative model will take three
stages. We will look first of all at the dynamics of the self as an
integrative task, showing how the various aspects of the self are
related to each other, to other persons, and to God. Second, we
will look at the ecology of the self, showing how the core of the
self is integrated 	in three 	spheres, 	or environments, 	each
interfacing with the 	other. Third, we will look at the 	life
continuum as a context for 	therapy. All this is based on a
biblical anthropology as the core paradigm for developing a
"Christian psychology." By a Christian psychology I mean a
psychological understanding of personhood that is informed by
the biblical story of humans as created by God, bearing the
divine image, and having a destiny that defines quality of life
here on earth and determines the ultimate meaning and goal of
personal identity .1
The Integrative Self: A Developmental Model
People may be viewed as a set of subsystems, systemically
related. That is, each subsystem with its relative autonomy,
which makes up the person, is part of a whole-which 	is more
than the sum of the parts. For example, the physical body is a
system with its own functional relationship 	of parts, each
contributing to the life of the body. At the same time, the
physical body is often affected by the 	mental 	process, as
evidenced by the many varieties of psychosomatic symptoms.
The mind and the body are thus "systemically" related, though
each has its own distinctive function.
One way of understanding the biblical teaching that persons
are created in the "image and likeness of God" is to think of
humans as related simultaneously to God and to each other. To
the degree that one system or one aspect of the person operates
"temperamentally," 	or idiosyncratically, there is disorder and
alienation from the total well-being of the system. The effect of
sin is to produce this "temperament" 	of individuality, 	self-
aggrandizement, suspicion and fear of the other, and alienation
from the shared life with the other and with God. Thus we hold
that the biblical expression "image of God" applies to the entire
human self, body and soul, including the social and environ-

-- 33 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	33
mental existence of the person. This is why the Bible views sin
as pervading every aspect of human life, not merely the moral or
spiritual dimension.
One could achieve a degree of "health" in terms of functional
competence within each subsystem of the person. For example,
specific therapeutic gains might be achieved by helping a client
overcome severe depression with the result that life can again
become useful and meaningful. Yet other problem areas, such as
sexual 	dysfunction 	or 	troubled 	interpersonal 	relationships,
might still exist. The one subsystem that caused depression has
been healed, but other systems still are not adequately function-
ing. But unless all the subsystems are oriented to the overall
system in a functional and fulfilling way, there will be only
partial health from a wholistic perspective. Considered from the
theological standpoint of human beings as systematically related
to God and the other, spiritual wholeness and psychical health
are systemically related. The apostle Paul used systemic lan-
guage in a nontechnical sense when referring to the relation of
the members of the Christian community to the "whole body":
"If one member suffers, all suffer together; if one member is
honored, all rejoice together" 	(I Cor. 12:26). In scolding the
Corinthian Christians for celebrating the Lord's Supper to the
exclusion of some, Paul suggests that some have become sick
and some have died because of these actions (I Cor. 11:30). Our
purpose here is to show in a schematic way why this is so.
GOD 	GOD
Physical
1 	So ialt>----------<t---1 	So ial>
Per onal 	· 	Per 	nal
Se ual 	Mental 	I Se ual 	Physical
Psy 	ical 	I Psyc ical
t Spi ·tuaI 	, Spi tual
SELF 	SELF
Figure I
A schematic diagram of a systems approach to the integration
of the self in this threefold way would look like figure 1.
Consider 	the 	diagram 	from a 	developmental 	standpoint.
Reading from top to bottom, we see that the progression is from

-- 34 of 257 --

34 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
social to personal to sexual to psychical and finally to spiritual.
As spiritual beings we then have an orientation to God as Spirit
that 	runs 	right 	back through 	each 	of the 	other 	subsets 	or
subsystems 	of the self.
We enter into life as infants held in a social relation to our
parents. We are not yet differentiated 	as "persons" 	with a self
identity 	that exists over and against 	other 	selves. 	This 	self
identity is formed as "I" begin to distinguish myself from "you"
or even "it." Further development 	entails sexual differentiation,
with gender 	identity 	assimilated 	into the core self identity,
again with respect to the sexual and personal identity of other
persons. The development 	of psychical experience and capacity
comes later, with a deeper capacity to feel and express emotions.
Infants surely do have a psychical capacity, but their full range
of experience and expression are quite limited. Small children
cry easily 	when 	hurt 	or frustrated, 	but 	have 	not 	sufficient
psychical depth 	to cry at weddings!
Each person 	represents 	a duality 	of the physical 	and the
nonphysical 	(mental). Each person is also created 	in a social
construct as the original and primary form of humanity. This is
one way of understanding 	the statement in Genesis 2:18: "It is
not good that the man should 	be alone." 	The 	fundamental
ecology of persons 	is constituted 	by fellow humanity, 	or co-
humanity.2
The purpose of this diagram is not to suggest that these are
stages meant to conform strictly to the theories of developmental
psychology. 	Rather, I am suggesting 	a general 	conformity to
developmental 	theories of the self for the sake of showing that
what we understand by the "image of God" theologically can be
construed in a way congruent with these developmental 	tasks of
becoming a mature person. The image of God is "given., in the
sense that each person is born with an actual orientation toward
personhood that provides the potential of becoming a person in
the fullest sense. Thus we do not mean to suggest that one only
has a human spirit when that stage of development 	is achieved,
but that the human spirit given by God orients us toward him
and integrates 	every other aspect of our personal 	being. The
human spirit and the image of God need to be developed in the
growth of the person the same as other aspects of personality.
The function of the human spirit at an early age is restricted in
its expression, 	though 	fully present. 	As the 	self grows, the

-- 35 of 257 --

COUNSELINGTHE WHOLEPERSON 	35
human spirit also grows in its expressive capacity. This in no
way suggests that one is less a "spiritual" being at infancy. In
the same way, the image of God is present in the life of the
person from the beginning, though the expression of that image
will grow developmentally as the person matures.
It is quite apparent in this model that the spiritual dimension
is not placed as an initial or even "higher" aspect of the self.
Rather, it is shown both as the goal of personal development and
as the source of the person's orientation to God and the other. If
the spiritual dimension of selfhood were portrayed as the first or
highest in the model, this could lead to the assumption that one
could develop a spiritual life and orientation toward God with
no real integration of the other aspects of the self, or even with a
neglect of these aspects.
Some approaches to counseling from a Christian perspective
seem to assume an anthropology that places the spiritual life as
the higher or initial life of the self. This is combined with a
tendency to bracket the spiritual with the mental, or rational,
self. By appealing to a spiritual motivation that is essentially
mental, or cognitive, counselors may seek to direct the client
toward a "biblical" way of thinking as the source of solving
personal problems. The assumption is that if one is spiritually
oriented 	toward God's principles 	and lives "obediently" 	in
accordance with these principles, all else will follow. For some
this seems to work. But for those unable to accept this principle
of spiritual 	obedience 	as the solution to all problems, the
counseling may not be effective.
For example, in the case of Jay Adams, a Christian counselor
who uses the Bible as a textbook for counseling, a person
seeking counseling must agree to accept biblical authority as a
spiritual guide before entering into the counseling sessions.
From this same anthropological premise, Adams rejects psycho-
therapy out of hand as failing to recognize the essentially
spiritual nature of all personal problems.3 As a result, he offers
no options for Christians to counsel non-Christians except that
conversion to biblical authority and the lordship of Christ be a
condition of entrance into therapy. Nevertheless, it should also
be said that the effectiveness of the Jay Adams model with those
who do receive help based on the principle of biblical authority
and who achieve an integrated personal and social life points to
the intrinsic therapeutic role of spiritual life open to the Word

-- 36 of 257 --

36 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
and Spirit of God. It is for the purpose of providing counseling
from a Christian perspective for these, both Christian and non-
Christian, who have not achieved this therapeutic integration
that we propose this alternative.
In our model we propose an alternative for Christians who
counsel to approach persons in an integrative way, as human
persons first of all, based on a biblical anthropology rather than a
cognitive belief system. The Bible consistently views persons as
social as well as spiritual beings. The effects of sin, as pointed
out above, are found in the social as well as in the moral and
spiritual life of persons. Likewise, the effects of redemption as
therapeutic intervention and healing are measured in terms of
restoration of relationships and of reconciliation with God. This
does not rule out, as we will show in later chapters, such
spiritual resources as faith, prayer, the Holy Spirit, and the use
of the Bible. Nor does it mean that conversion to Jesus Christ
cannot be part of the therapeutic outcome for clients who are
counseled by Christians.
In figure I, the spiritual dimension of the self serves as the
integrating motive and drive for all the other components of the
sel£ If there should be disorder or dysfunction at any of the
other dimensions-say 	the sexual-this will be a hindrance to
the integration of the self as a function of the life of the spirit.
The difference between this model and Jay Adams's is that in
this case the spiritual dimension is not located primarily in the
cognitive or mental faculty of the self. Rather, the spiritual
dimension is a movement of the whole self as an integrated
person. Instead of spirituality in the form of "biblical thinking,"
this model suggests spirituality as more of a "biblical practice"
of life. Biblical practice as a model of wholeness and holiness is
typically described in terms of integrative life, both in the
relation of the mental and the psychical life and in the sexual,
personal, and social dimension. For example, in his letter to the
Galatians Paul describes the "works of the flesh" in terms of
interpersonal conflicts and disorders along with inner drives that
reflect psychic disorder-jealousy, 	anger, selfishness, party
spirit, etc. (Gal. 5:19-21). So, too, the fruit of the Spirit is
depicted in terms of positive inner congruence with social
relationships 	that 	are 	edifying and 	upbuilding-love, 	joy,
peace, gentleness, kindness, etc. (Gal. 5:22-23).
Now, Jay Adams would certainly agree that biblical practice is

-- 37 of 257 --

COUNSELINGTHE WHOLEPERSON 	37
what is desired as the outcome of counseling. He differs from
the model presented in that he gives greater therapeutic agency
to the 	cognitive-spiritual 	as the 	source of psycho-personal
health. We are suggesting, instead, that dysfunction at the social,
personal, sexual, or psychical subsystem of the self can hinder
spiritual development and so undermine biblical practice as a
way of wholistic and godly living. This model makes room for
legitimate therapeutic focus on one or more of the subsystems as
a way of facilitating spiritual and personal development. The
health, ecological wholeness, or holiness of the person is thus
represented by the orientation of the spirit through all the other
subsystems toward God, who is Spirit, and to the other, as "soul
mate," or "help meet," as the Scripture says (Gen. 2:18 KJV).	4
Figure 	1 also shows that 	the 	physical 	and 	nonphysical
(mental) aspects of the 	self are connected 	to each of the
components of the self. This serves to preserve a balance and
positive tension between the physical and mental aspects of the
personality for each of the components. If the spujtual dimen-
sion should be moved to the side and relate primarily through
the mental side of the self, the religious self will become either
rationalistic or mystical-both 	essentially 	movements 	away
from the concreteness and embodiedness of the self.
In the same way, there are both physical and mental aspects to
a healthy 	psychical and 	sexual life. Should these 	become
primarily 	either 	physical 	or mental. 	this 	will 	represent 	a
distortion and dysfunction for the self in its process of growth
and development. What can be called therapeutic gains in a
clinical sense are corrections made in the various subsystems of
the sel£ These corrections facilitate positive relations among the
systems. A variety of therapeutic 	strategies 	will be 	used,
depending 	on the specific therapeutic 	gain to be achieved
within each subset. For example, behavior modification works
well where there are cause-and-effect mechanisms that contrib-
ute to the functioning of a subsystem. Biofeedback techniques
recognize the systemic connection between the physical and
psychical subsystems. Psychoanalytic-oriented therapy can un-
cover factors that are repressed in identity formation. Object
relations psychology can provide new therapeutic strategies for
persons who lack positive identity formation and continuity.5
Counseling the whole person thus means an approach that is
informed by this systems-and-developmental model of person-

-- 38 of 257 --

38 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
hood as an integrative whole. The image of God is viewed as a
positive orientation 	to self as essentially 	good, to others as a
context for self-development 	and fulfillment, and to God as a
measure of personal and social health.
In this 	section 	we 	have 	described 	the 	human 	person 	as
integrative 	by virtue of a core humanity that is-
• 	Developmental 	in its growth toward maturity in the image
of God-first 	social, then personal, sexual, psychical, and
finally spiritual;
• 	Systemic in nature, with each component contributing 	to
the whole-both 	mental 	and physical combining 	in the
"gestalt" 	of the self;
• 	Spiritually open and growing through the integration of the
self with 	itself, with 	others, 	and toward 	God-making
personal humanity 	the core of spirituality 	and health.
The Ecology of the Self 	A Therapeutic Model
Our analysis of the dynamics of the self from an integrative
and developmental 	perspective, 	as described 	in figure 1, con-
tains an implicit ecological structure that needs to become more
explicit as a therapeutic 	model. The concept of ecology in the
most general sense simply means the relationship of an organ-
ism to its environment, or to a structure of interactive forces that
mutually determine 	both the organism and its environment. 	In
psychology the term was initiated by Allen Wicker in Introduc-
tion to Ecological Psychology.6 The term is being used here in a
nontechnical 	sense 	to describe 	the 	interaction 	of the 	three
spheres of the self in its embodied existence, its existence with
and for the other person(s), and its existence as spiritual being
related to God.
The unity of the self is experienced as a process of integration,
with both self identity 	and self activity (behavior) congruent
with the three ecological spheres, as shown in figure 2.
The 	core of the self is present 	in each of the ecological
spheres-the 	physical, social, and spiritual. The self can also be
called the "soul" in a theological sense as distinguished 	from
the "soul" 	of animals in a more general sense. In a biblical
anthropology, both human and nonhuman creatures possess a
creaturely "soul," by which is meant the basic life principle or

-- 39 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	39
SPHERES OF THE SELF
SELF .. EC------- 	slial 	sphere 	BEHAVIORS
~---~	(Soul/psyche 	$
Spiritual sphere
Figure 2
source. (The Hebrew term, used of both humans and animals, is
nephesh.) 1 The human soul is the orientation of the total self as a
physical, social, and spiritual being toward God as source and
destiny. Charles V. Gerkin describes the self as "soul" in such a
way as to include the various psychological concepts.
To use the designation self is to emphasize the line of experienced
continuity and interpretive capacity which emerges from the selfs
object relations. To use the term ego is to emphasize the coming
together of a nexus of forces demanding mediation and compro-
mise •••. 	The term soul is here used as a theological term that
points to the selfs central core subject to the ego's conflicting
forces and to the ultimate origins of the self in God. The soul is the
gift of God bestowed upon the individual with the breath of life. It
is thus the self, including its ego conflicts, as seen from an ultimate
perspective-the 	perspective of the self as nurtured and sustained
in the life of God.s
In figure 2, the self is identified as the psyche, the Greek word
used in the New Testament for "soul," or the life of the self. It is
used to describe the inner state of Jesus as he contemplates the
cross: "Now is my soul [psyche] troubled. And what shall I say?
'Father, save me from this hour'? No, for this purpose I have
come to this hour" Gohn 12:27). The deep ambivalence (or "ego
conflicts," as Gerkin describes it) is felt by Jesus in the core of
his very being, expressed by the term psyche, or soul. Jesus
resolved this ambivalence, achieving unity of the self (soul) by
integrating the perceived loss at the physical level and at the
social level into a behavior that gave meaning to pain, suffering,
and loss of life itself.
Earlier we used the term psyche in figure 1 to represent the
capacity for feelings as distinguished from the personal, social,

-- 40 of 257 --

40 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
sexual, and spiritual aspects of the self. Here we are using
psyche in a broader sense as equivalent to the self, or soul as the
center and source of the life of the person. Thus there is a
psychical dimension to the physical, social, and spiritual life of
the self as depicted 	in figure 2. This is done to show the
ecological relationship between the three spheres of the self as
the experienced 	self in the world and with others.
Several things emerge from this ecological matrix of the self in
the three spheres of its existence. First, the self (soul) in its
totality is present in each of the spheres. If one's life (soul) is
reduced to virtually a physical existence, with the loss of social
relationships and even loss of spiritual perception of God ("My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"), then the soul, or
the selfhood of the person, is fully present up to the point of the
spirit's being separated from the body (death). Likewise, the
social and 	spiritual 	spheres 	each represents 	the 	self in its
totality. Yet the nature of the ecological matrix of personhood is
such that no single sphere can stand alone as the reality of the
self. For example, if a person should go into a coma and be
unable to respond at the social or spiritual level, we would still
view the person as a total "self" rather than merely a physical
being. 	But scientists 	have 	demonstrated 	that 	the 	personal
development of the infant is linked with the physical bonding
that occurs through being 	held and touched 	from the very
beginning. This is what is meant by the ecological matrix in
which 	the 	self 	experiences 	itself 	as physical, 	social, 	and
spiritual.
Second, we must say that any pathology or disorder of the self
in one or more of the spheres affects the self in all spheres. This
explains why one cannot bless the "soul" of a person who is
hungry 	without 	giving that person 	something 	to eat. "If a
brother or sister is ill-clad and in lack of daily food, and one of
you says to them, 'Go in peace, be warmed and filled,' without
giving them the things needed 	for the body, what does it
profit?" Oames 2:15-16). The answer is, of course, it does not
profit! If one claims a spiritual relationship with God so that
"God's 	love abides 	in him," but does not provide 	for the
physical needs of a brother or sister and instead "closes his heart
against him," God's love cannot abide in him (1 John 3:17)1
In the same way, we could say that to provide for the physical
needs of a person and yet deprive him or her of social and

-- 41 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	41
spiritual health is to violate the soul or very self of the person.
The ecological spheres of the self not only mean that the self is
present in each sphere, but that each sphere is essential to some
degree to the health and wholeness of the self.
Third, we may say that no authentic approach to the self can
bypass the ecological matrix as embodied, social, and spiritual
existence. A "psychology" that seeks to describe the self and
prescribe therapeutic aid for the self only in terms of the psyche
as disembodied, impersonal, and nonspiritual selfhood cannot
measure up to a "Christian psychology" that understands the
self (soul) in this threefold way.
Fourth, we may say that there will ordinarily be pathologies
that are quite specific to each of the three ecological spheres,
even though the behavioral symptoms may appear in any of
them. For example, a disorder that is essentially biological in
origin due to, say, hormonal or chemical imbalance may cause a
depression of the self so as to impair function at the social and
spiritual levels. One may feel that "God has abandoned" the
self, or that withdrawal from social relationships is the only
escape, while the etiology of the problem may be primarily
biological rather than spiritual. The ecological nature of the self
results in this "pathological spillover," with the result that
diagnosis becomes more complex than merely observing or
noting symptoms.
The Christian who counsels will be open to the possibility
that the source of the problem may be in any of the three
spheres and will use therapeutic 	strategies accordingly. Not
every disorder or problem of human behavior can be charged to
spiritual failure, any more than all problems can be assumed to
have a biological cause. Yet, to include spiritual openness and
health 	as part of the 	therapeutic 	goal is not considered 	a
violation of therapeutic and clinical practice for the Christian
psychologist. So also, a wholistic counseling approach should be
able to discern pathology at the spiritual level of the self and
provide 	appropriate 	therapy. 	Here 	might be 	the 	place 	for
dealing with guilt and forgiveness, for example.
A person caught in the trap of self-hatred or low self-esteem
can express symptoms that might appear in any of the three
spheres. Often the person projects God's judgment, internalizes
and reinforces it, and uses self-condemnation as a means of
atonement. In other cases, low self-esteem appears as a dysfunc-

-- 42 of 257 --

42 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
tion in interpersonal relationships or can even produce symp-
toms of a physical nature. The self is failing in its attempt to
achieve integration and wholeness. A therapist specializing in
some form of ego psychology, or psychoanalysis, may be able to
trace the patterns of the pathology and attempt therapy through
a repatterning of the ego and enabling of the self to function
more effectively and wholistically. There is no reason why a
Christian therapist cannot offer this kind of help if adequately
trained and certified.
All people get well for the same reason, regardless of the
therapeutic method used I The source of healing is in the person,
not the therapist or counselor. "Psychotherapy does not cure
patients," suggests Thomas Paolino. "The capacity for cure lies
within each patient."9 Facilitating a movement toward health in
one sphere may release the self to grow toward health in another
sphere. The "ego" as a specific subject of psychological atten-
tion lies between the self and its lived experience in the world.
When the self is addressed 	and responds at the level of its
spiritual sphere, the "ego" of the self is also touched and healed.
As we shall see later, effective mediation of God's grace not only
is a spiritual means for healing, but touches the very core of the
human self, enabling it and assisting it in the integrative task of
becoming whole.10
In this section we have attempted 	to show how the core
anthropological model as depicted in figure 1 can be construed
as a therapeutic model as in figure 2. No attempt has been made
to relate 	specific therapeutic 	theories 	and methods 	to this
model, but instead we have sought to show how a variety of
theories and models may be used within this model when the
ecological interactions of the human self are understood in this
threefold way. The ecological matrix provides a therapeutic
model that depicts the integrative task of the self as-
• 	Open 	to growth in 	each 	sphere, 	as a physical, 	social,
spiritual person;
• 	Known to self and others as the same person 	in each
sphere;
• 	Developing 	psychological 	(ego) strength 	and health 	as
measured 	by positive interrelationship 	among the three
spheres.
The connection of the self to its life as a set of behaviors is

-- 43 of 257 --

COUNSELING mE 	WHOLE PERSON 	43
what now must be considered as a life continuum and context
for therapy.
The Life Continuum as Context for Therapy
The life of the self, of course, cannot be neatly diagrammed
and displayed in a figure, as we have attempted to do. Each
person's life is a pilgrimage of the self, a narrative created by the
events 	that 	are 	experienced 	and 	the 	way in 	which 	these
experiences are integrated into the identity of the self.11 In Peter
Shaffer's play Equus, the psychiatrist, Martin Dysart, has been
treating 	a boy who blinded 	several horses 	in a psychotic
episode. Through the treatment the psychiatrist discovers that
the boy at an early age had become obsessed with horses when
his atheist father substituted the picture of the head of a horse in
his room for a picture of Christ. Now the boy experiences God as
Equus, viewing him, calling him to worship, and ultimately
judging him through the eyes of horses. Dysart, in reflecting on
this phenomenon 	of self formation, says:
A Child is born into a world of phenomena all equal in their power
to enslave. It sniffs-it 	sucks-it 	strokes its eyes over the whole
uncomfortable range. Suddenly one strikes. Why? Moments snap
together like magnets, forging a chain of shackles. Why? I can trace
them. I can even, with time, pull them apart again. But why at the
start they 	were 	ever 	magnetized 	at all-just 	those 	particular
moments of experience and no others-I 	don't know. And nor does
anyone else. Yeti/I 	don't know-if 	I can never know that-then
what am I doing here? And I don't mean clinically doing or
socially doing-I 	mean fundamentally/ 	These questions, these
Whys, are fundamental-yet 	they have no place in a consulting
room.12
The life of the self in the process from being to becoming is a
precarious and even treacherous path, as we have said. Yet,
given the right context, it is also a path of growth, healing, and
discovery. 	The 	larger 	context 	of life 	provides 	therapeutic
resources, sometimes minimally and sometimes adequately. In
this broad context, therapy means not only healing, but the
growth of the self into its fullest potential, regarding oneself
positively as an integrative "gestalt" of body and soul. It is also
to 	experience 	the 	self as affirmed and 	valued 	by 	others,
including 	the 	reality 	of trust, 	loyalty, 	and 	shared 	life 	in

-- 44 of 257 --

44 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
community. So, too, this integrative, therapeutic context of life is
meant to include 	spiritual values realized 	through worship,
prayer, the peace and grace of God, and hope as assurance of
ultimate value of the self as upheld by God beyond this life.
We recall here the threefold integrative task as discussed in
the previous chapter. There is integration as embodied soul, as
related self, and as the competence to integrate embodied and
related self to God as the source of the human spirit.
The idea of life as pilgrimage is a therapeutic continuum for
all persons when considered in this perspective. This therapeu-
tic continuum stretches from the most informal caregiving that
takes place through domestic, community, and friendship en-
counters to the more specialized forms of pastoral care and
psychotherapy in a clinical setting. On this continuum, counsel-
ing is a form of support and, if needed, intervention for enabling
persons to grow toward health. 	The resources 	used by the
professional 	counselor 	may be 	more narrowly 	defined 	and
focused, but the process of healing is the same. All persons get
well for the same reason, regardless of the therapeutic method
used. Getting well in this case means recovering the therapeutic
process of life itself. The only source of healing is in the person
being 	healed, 	though 	the 	process 	may depend 	on 	skilled
intervention 	with appropriate therapeutic 	methods.
In many instances the New Testament uses the same word for
salvation as for healing. 	The 	Greek 	word 	soteria can be
translated "salvation" or "healing," depending on the context.
But the word therapeuo is also used to describe an act of healing
ministry 	by Jesus 	(Matt. 9:35). This 	shows 	that 	salvation
includes therapy as one means to the gift of life at its fullest.
We will look at three aspects of this pilgrimage of the self as a
context for therapy: self formation, self socialization, and self
fulfillment.
Self Formation: The Hermeneutical Task
The term hermeneutics comes from the Greek name for the
god Hermes, son of Zeus, who served as the messenger of the
gods. According to Greek mythology, Hermes gave increase to
herds and guarded boundaries and roads. He was also the god of
science and invention, of eloquence, of cunning and trickery
and theft, of luck and treasure-trove. He even conducted the

-- 45 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	45
dead to Hades. Indeed, Hermes seems to resemble a modem
pastoral counselor!
In a more technical sense, hermeneutics is a form of literary
critique 	in which 	the 	meaning 	of a text is interpreted 	in
accordance with its intent and purpose. Here the term repre-
sents the formation of the self as it "interprets" the events and
experiences of life.
At the beginning of this chapter we mentioned Andrew, a
young man with AIDS, a life-threatening disease. We spoke of
his response as a "therapeutic redefinition" of his life when he
protested that he was not dying with AIDS, but living with
AIDS. How was he able to do this? Did he suddenly acquire this
therapeutic skill? Hardly. The capacity to be open to "bad luck"
as well as "good fortune" is evidence 	of a "hermeneutical"
approach to life whereby the self possesses a core of positive
values that transcend sheer facts such as disease or even death.
The self actually interprets facts and experiences according to
its core values. Where the formation of the self has resulted in
core values that are inherently 	positive and open to change,
there will be a capacity to interpret even negative experiences
in a therapeutic or healing way. This is done by accepting those
experiences for what they are and building them into the larger
goals of the self. For Andrew, it means to view each day as a day
of living rather than as a day of dying.
The apostle Paul, when confronted with his personal "thorn
in the flesh," found that it could not be removed through prayer.
He concluded that he was given grace sufficient to live with it
(2 Cor. 12:7-9). Not simply enduring this problem, Paul added,
"I will all the more gladly boast of my weaknesses, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me." Paul's self formation had
taken root at the reality of God's love for him. Given the chance,
he would still have preferred to live without the weakness. Yet
he did not become morbidly attached to his deformity. Instead,
he "made it fit" into the more wholistic pattern of his life. It
sounds so simple! But how did he do it?
The hermeneutical task for Paul as a basis for his therapeutic
redefinition under adversity had begun years earlier when he
came to believe that he had been set apart for this ministry
"before 	I was born" 	(Gal. 1:15)1 Through the process of a
conversion to Jesus as the Messiah there was also a conversion
of Jesus of Nazareth into the inner life of Saul of Tarsus. Now

-- 46 of 257 --

46 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
the apostle Paul is able to project in a retrospective 	way his
"story of conversion" back to his core identity. This therapeutic
redefinition did not cast out the "old Saur' in favor of a "new
Paul." Rather, an incredible continuity was established for him
in his core identity, going back to his very conception. This
enabled him to take responsibility 	for persecuting 	Christians.
Many Christians apparently 	lost their lives through his zeal!
Having made these 	wrong and hurtful actions part of the
whole of his life, Paul gained the capacity to include suffering
and continued pain as part of the whole. We are not told how
this happened. But it is worth noting that when he did arrive in
Jerusalem after his startling conversion, the disciples were not
prepared to receive him. It was Barnabas, whose name means
"son of consolation," who interceded 	for him with those same
disciples (Acts 9:26-30). 	It sounds so easy! But we can well
imagine the "counseling" that Barnabas had to do to enable Paul
to cope with this rejection and to enable the disciples to trust
their very lives to Paul.
One of the contributions of object relations psychology as a
therapeutic 	approach has been precisely 	in this area of self
formation through relation to "objects" that remain present to
the self despite discontinuity, 	separation, or deprivation for a
time. 13 Charles Gerkin, who bases his counseling approach on
object relations theory, says:
To extend D. W. Winnicott's language, it is the role of interpreta-
tion to sustain and solidify the line of continuing existence that
provides the self with a sense of continuity at all levels of its
functioning. The line of life becomes a line of interpretation-the
hermeneutics of the self. Within a theological perspective I would
place that process at the center of the life of the soul in all its
relationships.1•
The Scriptures tell us that Jesus, in the days of his flesh,
"offered up prayers and supplications, with loud cries and tears,
to him who was able to save him from death" (Heb. 5:7). This
strong language describes quite clearly the psychic trauma and
pain that Jesus experienced when confronted with the inevita-
bility of the cross. At the very least this encourages us to know
that such turmoil and pain are not due to sin, nor are they
contrary to our basic human 	spirit 	A wholistic view of the

-- 47 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	47
person must include such terrible depths of fear and pain if it is
to be authentically 	in touch with persons in need.
Yet the author of Hebrews goes on to say of this same Jesus
that "for the joy that was set before him [he] endured the cross,
despising 	the 	shame" 	(Heb. 	12:2). Can 	people 	who 	have
encountered the shame of physical, sexual, or emotional viola-
tion actually learn to "despise the shame"? Only if the core of
the self experiences love as a powerful therapeutic redefinition
of the self as a constant and continual reality. For shame is
fundamentally a matter of self-interpretation. "Although he was
a Son, he learned obedience," 	writes the author of Hebrews
(Heb. 5:8). Read another way, it means that precisely because he
knew himself to be the beloved Son of the Father, he could
accept with humility and dignity the obedience that kept him
faithful, even to experience the shameful and dreadful death
upon a cross. "Despising 	the 	shame" 	is not hating 	it, but
reinterpreting it as pain. Pain can be healed when attached to a
meaningful purpose-it 	is called redemption. Shame can never
be healed 	as long as it is the selfs 	interpretation 	of itself.
Turning shame into pain, and pain into creative suffering, is a
way of experiencing redemption and becoming a child of God.
The traditional theological approach has been to interpret the
atoning death and resurrection of Jesus Christ as offering pardon
from sin. C. Norman Kraus suggests that the removal of sin as an
objective offense standing between God and humans does not
yet remove shame as the deeper problem of the human self.
Shame means that one has suffered loss of being, not merely loss
of status. The purpose of divine forgiveness is not merely to
pardon sin as a legal or objective fault, but to overcome shame,
which has weakened and destroyed the inner being of the self. 15
Counseling 	from a Christian perspective 	can bring to the
therapeutic sessions, in a narrower, more clinical sense, a basis
for the broader formation of the self as a life pilgrimage. This can
be a therapeutic process in which continuity is restored through
a vision and experience 	of God as the "object" 	of the self
formation present to the self even in those earlier experiences
that "split" the self off from its task of becoming a whole person.
The specific therapeutic techniques to be used in this case, of
course, are beyond the scope of this book. What I hope to
provide 	here is a theological basis for clinical therapy 	that
approaches the person on the life continuum of self formation.

-- 48 of 257 --

48 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Self Socialization: The Narrative Task
The process of self interpretation 	described 	above can be
viewed as a taskof creating the script or narrative for one's own
story. Forming personal identity through narrative has been
described helpfully by Stanley Hauerwas in his book A Commu-
nity of Character:
The necessary existence of the other for my own self is but a
reminder that the self is not something we create, but is a gift.
Thus we become who we are through the embodiment of the story
in the communities in which we are born. What is crucial is not
that we find some way to free ourselves from such stories or
community, but that the story which grasps us through our
community is true. And at least one indication of the truthfulness
of a community's story is how it forces me to live in it in a manner
that gives me the skill to take responsibility for my character.16
The life continuum is a process of socialization of the self.
Hauerwas suggests that the concept of story can be a way of
defining 	the 	concepts, 	values, 	and 	experiences 	that 	shape
personal identity, for better 	or for worse. In this sense, the
ecological matrix of the self, as displayed in figure 2, points
toward behavior 	as necessarily 	understood 	in a context of
socialization, 	or community. 	We express 	ourselves 	through
forms of behavior that are physical, social, and spiritual (reli-
gious). Yet specific forms of behavior are not directly related to
the self, but only indirectly, 	through the ecological matrix.
While the self is present as a totality in each sphere, each sphere
also contributes to the total "gestalt" of the self. Thus behavior
in one sphere must be understood in terms of the ecological
relationships of the three spheres.
This model also helps us to see that pathology in the form of
antisocial or self-destructive behavior may have its roots in the
lack of integrative self formation in the sense of having a "story"
that is truthful, to use Hauerwas's term.
One way of relating the Christian story to the therapeutic
process is by understanding 	the formation of the self as a
narrative task of developing a story that gives the self a core set
of values concerning oneself, others, and the future. Clinical
therapeutic techniques can then be contextualized by a culture
or context in which this Christian story is authenticated 	and
experienced as one's own story. This will be developed further

-- 49 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	49
in chapter 4. For now we see that the context of self formation as
a therapeutic process includes one's developing life story as
well as the story of one's future existence.
Self Fulfillment: The Eschatological Task
In theology the term eschatology simply means the study of
the final events that will take place at the end of the age. It
derives from the Greek word eschaton. which means "last." We
have stressed that the core values of the self include not only
values that relate to self-esteem, but values rooted in relation to
others and to the future. The life continuum as a context for
therapy includes the future as well as the past. Too often, I am
afraid, therapy 	has been 	oriented 	toward the 	factors and
experiences in one's past to the neglect of the future orientation
of the self. Counseling the whole person entails an approach
that includes future reality as impinging on the present as much
as does the past. Gerkin offers this explanation:
The level of acceptance of eschatological identity is often signaled
by a reduction in the selfs preoccupation with itself and a
concomitant enhancement in the selfs capacity for concern for and
participation with other persons.•.. 	Rather than being depleted
by the demands and pressures upon the self that threaten the selfs
existence, the self is increasingly nourished and fulfilled by
engagement with others in activities oriented toward the renewal
of life together in the spirit of the Kingdom.11
For the people of Israel in the Old Testament, as well as for
the early Christian community, there appeared to be a self-
conscious "therapy" in one's relationship to the community.
That is to say, for the Israelite, personal identity was bound up
in the corporate self of the community as related to the original
founders-Abraham 	and Sarah, for example. This relationship
was part of the socialization of the individual person through
ritual, story, and promise. But the very fact of promise pointed
the individual forward to a destiny that gave present value to the
sacrifices and struggles of everyday life.
The same can be said of the early New Testament Christian
community. Not only was the community founded upon the
memory of Jesus, with the rituals (baptism, Lord's Supper)
oriented back to his historical presence, but the community was
also looking forward toward its future signaled by the story of

-- 50 of 257 --

50 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
the resurrection 	and the promise of the coming of Christ to
gather his own people.
The biblical anthropology presented earlier was meant to lay
a foundation for this eschatological fulfillment of the person by
showing that everyone's life is oriented spiritually to God as a
core human value. The theological concept of eschatological
fulfillment through the coming of the kingdom of God and of
Jesus Christ, along with the promise of resurrection of the body,
is first of all a core value of the human self before it becomes a
religious, or even Christian, concept. The life continuum as a
context for therapy provides for the therapeutic 	use of the
Christian story of the kingdom of God and resurrection of the
body with eternal life as a core personal value.
The 	newspaper 	story that revealed 	Andrew•s therapeutic
interpretation of his life as a person with AIDS did not tell us
what "living with AIDS,, meant to him in terms of the ultimate
and future reality of his life beyond the almost certain death that
his disease would bring. We do not know to what extent his
personal integrative task incorporates the spiritual sphere-in
particular, 	the 	eschatological 	hope 	of resurrection 	through
personal relation to Jesus Christ. Certainly this dimension of his
life 	would 	provide 	additional 	resources 	for his 	continued
"hermeneutical,, task of facing each day as a living person rather
than a dying one.
Summary
In this chapter we have attempted to provide a theological
basis for counseling a person like Andrew as a whole person,
based on a biblical anthropology that includes the body and
mind in an integrative process of spiritual life oriented to God
and others. In figure 1 we presented an integrative model that
was developmental in its growth toward maturity, systemic in
nature by relating each component of the self to the other and
the whole, and spiritually open to God and the other as the core
of the sel£
The ecological matrix of the self was then presented as :figure
2, depicting the self relating to each sphere of life as embodied
self, social self, and spiritual sel£ This provides a therapeutic
basis for approaching the self through the behaviors related to
each sphere, 	using appropriate 	methods. 	In this model we

-- 51 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	51
discovered that the ego dysfunctions described by some psy-
chologists are related ecologically to the three spheres. One
implication 	of this 	is that 	healthy 	ego development 	in 	a
psychological sense is directly related to personal and spiritual
growth.
Finally, we have traced out the life continuum as a context for
therapy, showing the relevance of the Christian story to the life
story as a pilgrimage of the self in creating one's own story. The
growth of the self as an integrative project is a process of self
formation and self socialization, empowered by and sustained
by the 	eschatological reality 	of resurrection 	of the 	body,
reconstituted social relationships, and the spiritual reality of life
with God through Jesus Christ. This is what it means to be
created in and live out the image of God as the form of one's
own personal human story,
More simply put, the two chapters now completed have led us
to conclude that-
• 	Personal humanity is basically therapeutic by virtue of its
own integrative task;
• All people get well for the same reason, regardless of the
therapeutic method used;
• 	Spiritual life is grounded in authentic human life, so that
spiritual resources augment and complete the selfs move-
ment toward health;
• 	Each person is on a life continuum of growth with its own
therapeutic resources and context;
• 	Counselors do not cure people; the capacity for health lies
within each person.
We have not addressed the role of the counselor in this
therapeutic context and process. Intervention for the purpose of
effecting therapy and growth is almost a sacred task in light of
the high value we place on the sanctity of the self in developing
its own life and character. "We are born into other people's
intentions," 	wrote Theodore 	Roszak.is And even 	our good
intentions can violate the space that the self occupies and can
manipulate its growth to fit our ideas. Can Christians counsel so
as to produce change and growth without violating the person-
hood of another? We think so, and in the next chapter we
present our case.

-- 52 of 257 --

52 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Notes
1. I have developed the foundations for a biblical anthropology
more extensively in On Being Human (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1982).
Roger Hording argues that there may well be a "Christian psychology"
that informs pastoral care (The Tree of Healing: Psychological and
Biblical Foundations for Counseling and Pastoral Care [Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1988]). It is a "psychology that is deeply rooted in the way
God has made us" (19). While he does not elaborate on this at length,
he does provide a brief outline 	of what he considers 	a biblical
perspective on our humanity: "We have supreme value; we are living
unities; we have broken relationships; we are restorable" (245).
2. I have discussed the concept of co-humanity as part of the
paradigm of a biblical anthropology in On Being Human, chapter 4.
3. Jay Adams is dean of the Institute of Pastoral Studies and visiting
professor of practical theology at Westminster Theological Seminary in
Philadelphia. Among his more important publications are Competent to
Counsel (1970; reprint, Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1986); The Christian
Counselor's Manual (1973; reprint, Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1986);
More Than Redemption: A Theology of Christian Counseling (Grand
Rapids: Baker, 1979); and "Nouthetic Counseling," in Helping People
Grow, ed. Gary Collins (Ventura, Calif.: Vision House, 1980).
The controlling assumption for Adams is that divine counsel is the
only option for providing therapy and the Bible is the basic textbook for
counseling ("Nouthetic 	Counseling," 	158). Nouthetic counseling is
based on the Greek verb noutheteo, " used by Paul in several instances
(e.g., 2 Tim. 3:15-17) to mean the kind of pastoral care that produces
change through verbal confrontation motivated by love, for the client's
health and God's glory (see Competent to Counsel, 51).
4. The concepts of "wholeness" 	and "holiness" 	have been the
subject of some discussion in the literature on integration in counsel-
ing. "Holiness" is taken to mean the particular character of a person as
the subject of sanctification, as in "sanctifying grace" applied through
the Holy Spirit. "Wholeness" 	is a more psychological term tending
toward functional well-being. The issue is whether or not one can be in
a state of "sanctification" or "grace" while at the same time lacking in
functional "wholeness." 	Those who hold that wholeness 	produces
holiness tend to assume that growth as a function of becoming a whole
person is what is meant by the theological term sanctification.
Professor Newton Malony at Fuller Seminary's graduate school of
psychology, for example, suggests that whole person incorporates both
psychological wholeness and spiritual holiness. "To be whole means to
be conscious of and adequate in all, not just some of life's environ-
ments" (Wholeness and Holiness: Readings in the Psychology/Theology
of Mental Health, ed. H. Newton Malony [Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983],

-- 53 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	53
20-21). Seward Hiltner suggests that the concept of ..health" includes
..cosmic wholeness," in which one's life may be in a state of harmony
with regard to the whole creation (..Salvation's Message about Health,"
in Wholeness and Holiness, 160).
My own view is that while wholeness as a psychological state is not a
presupposition of holiness as a spiritual state-as 	though good psycho-
logical health could ensure good personal or spiritual health-holiness
anticipates and seeks wholeness. I prefer not to set the terms in contrast
to each other, but rather to view both holiness and wholeness as part of
the tension between 	actuality of personal being and potential of
personal being so that one can grow in both holiness and wholeness
and yet be considered both ..whole" and ..holy" by virtue of being a
person created by God and as the object of God's grace and love.
5. For a helpful discussion of some of the forms of therapy currently
in use from a Christian perspective, see The Holy Spirit and Counsel-
ing: Theology and Theory, Marvin G. Gilbert and Raymond T. Brock,
eds. (Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson, 1985). Roger Hurding, in The Tree
of Healing, has produced an informative and critical review of the
secular psychologies and therapies, listing their basic assumptions,
aims, and methodologies, along with a discussion from a Christian
perspective. Hurding also includes an analysis and discussion of a
variety of Christian theories for counseling, making this one of the best
resource books available for pastors and Christian counselors.
6. Allen Wicker, Introduction to Ecological Psychology (Monterey,
Calif.: Brooks-Cole, 1979). Charles Gerkin also sees the context of self
development as an ecological relationship: ..The quality of the selfs
interpretation is not simply a product of its own individual effort. The
infant and mother (and/or other figures who share the mothering role)
together make up a social milieu, an ecology, which shapes a certain
cast to the •1am and you are' situation. The later development of partial
independence begins to shift more of the interpretive task onto the
developing self. But even into adulthood, the basis for interpretation of
the meaning of existence remains fundamentally social" (Gerkin, The
Living Human Document: Re-visioning Pastoral Counseling in a
Hermeneutical Mode [Nashville: Abingdon, 1984], 84-85).
7. For further discussion of the relation of soul to body and spirit,
see my book On Being Human, appendix A, 207-14.
8. Gerkin, The Living Human Document, 98.
9. Thomas Paolino, Jr., Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy (New York:
Brunner/Maze!, 1981), 13.
10. W. W. Meissner suggests that personal identity and spiritual
identity How out of the same ego source. Consequently the grace of
God, to produce spiritual growth, must also become the energizing
power of ego development (Life and Faith: Psychological Perspectives

-- 54 of 257 --

54 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
on Religious Experience [Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University
Press, 1987), 25ft). 	·
11. Gerkin conhibutes 	vitally to this discussion when he writes,
"Pastoral counseling undertaken in the hermeneutical mode [assumes]
the context of human life seen as pilgrimage set within a community
that shares a certain narrative vision or mythos concerning the whole
life in creation. The care provided by pastoral counseling is thus only
one aspect of a larger context of care provided by the community of
faith and life. Rather than 'treating' an 'illness• or 'solving' a 'problem,'
the pastoral counselor 	seeks to provide a more or less temporary
intensification of a process of care and prophetic ministry to persons
which the church in its ministry in other modes carries on with people
throughout their lives" (The Living Human Document, 178).
12. Peter Shaffer, Equus (New York: Avon, 1974).
13. The British school of object relations theory in the neo-Freudian
tradition includes such names as W. Ronald Fairburn, H. Gunhip, D.
W. Winnicott, and Melanie Klein. These theories sought to locate the
source of psychological problems in birth trauma and/or in the few
months immediately following birth, particularly in the infant's relation
to the parent (mother) as an object of attachment. The infant struggles to
internalize the mother object in a way that provides continuity through
the stages of separation and perceived abandonment. Successful object
internalization establishes an identity that can cope with change in the
object to which one relates without suffering anxiety or panic.
Frank Lake (1914-82) developed a monumental work attempting to
integrate object relations theory with Christian theology. This work,
titled Clinical Theology was first published in 1966 and has now been
published in an abridged form, edited by Martin H. Yeomans with the
same title, Clinical Theology: A Theological and Psychological Basis to
Clinical Pastoral Care (New York: Crossroad, 	1987). Lake's basic
model is a four-stage process of human development 	beginning with
acceptance (being) and nurture (well being) as the two input stages
experienced either positively or negatively during the first few months
of the infant's life. These are followed by the two output stages, status
and achievement. Failure to move through the first two stages due to
inadequate object internalization in the attachment/separation 	experi-
ence leads to "splitting" of the self, with a resulting schizoid reaction
(marked by withdrawal 	and death wish) or by a hysteric reaction
(marked by compulsive attachment or clinging). Central to his integra-
tive approach is the figure of Christ, who becomes a new "object" by
which one can pass through the stages of primal integration again and
emerge with a relatively healthy self identity formation leading to more
effective output in terms of status and achievement.

-- 55 of 257 --

COUNSELING THE WHOLE PERSON 	55
For those willing to struggle with some of the technical and complex
concepts, the book provides a provocative text on integration.
14. Gerkin, The Living Human Document, 102.
15. C. Norman Kraus, Jesus Christ Our Lord: Christology from a
Disciple's Perspective (Scottdale, Pa.: Herald Press, 1987), 205-28.
Kraus says, "In no way can shame be expiated through substitutionary
compensation or retaliation .... 	Only a forgiveness which covers the
past and a genuine restoration of relationship can banish shame. What
is needed is a restoration of communication. The rage which isolates
and insulates must be overcome. Reconciliation and restoration of
mutual intimate relationship through a loving open exchange is the
only way to heal resentment and restore lost self-esteem" (211).
From a psychological perspective, John Bradshaw views shame as a
"toxic" form of low self worth, contributing heavily to various forms of
addictive and compulsive behavior. See Bradshaw On: Healing the
Shame That Binds You (Deerfield Beach, Fla.: Health Communica-
tions, 1988).
16. Stanley Hauerwas, A Community of Character (South Bend, In.:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1981), 148-49.
17. Gerkin, The Living Human Document, 189. The line between
spiritual direction and psychotherapy is recognized by Gerkin, but not
made an artificial or an absolute boundary. "Against that background of
the psychologizing of everyday concern with problems of living and
spiritualizing of religious life and devotion, the model of pastoral
counseling here proposed may be seen as an alternative lying some-
where between psychotherapy and spiritual direction. Fundamentally
concerned with the selfs pilgrimage through the problems and crises of
everyday relational life, the hermeneutical theory is simultaneously
concerned with the formation of that side of the selfs paradoxical
identity rooted and grounded in God and the inbreaking of the
Kingdom. Here, of course, the theory becomes openly and unashamed-
ly confessional. Insofar as the horizon of understanding brought by the
counselor to the counseling relationship is thus involved in confession-
al faith, to that extent it entails a form of spiritual direction. But insofar
as that horizon represents psychological ways of attending to the inner
and relational workings of the self, it is a clearly recognizable form of
psychotherapy. Partaking of both, the model, both in design and
intention, embraces a psycho-spiritual form of ministry" (192-93).
18. Theodore Roszak, Person/Planet (Garden City, N.Y.: Double-
day/Anchor, 1979), 139.

-- 56 of 257 --

3
The Counselor 	as
Growth Promoter
The violation of personhood begins in the cradle, if not in the
womb. We learn our names and our natures at their hands, and
they cannot teach us more than they know or will freely tell. Can
there be families whose love is not treason against our natural
vocation?1
Theodore 	Roszak has a high view of human 	nature 	and,
apparently, a low view of human nurture. He is right on one
count-the 	violation of personhood 	begins early and, to hear
some tell it, continues 	through most of the growing years.
All of us lose our innocence in the cradle. Before we know
how it happened, we discover a streak of perversity expressed as
rebellion toward those who claim to love us and who have to
live with us. Something in us has been betrayed-or 	is the
betrayer.
Is it a need to manipulate and control, disguised as love, that
constitutes the treason, as Roszak would have us believe? Or
would it be treason against our human potential 	to leave us
alone? Would it not be an act of betrayal never to penetrate the
wall of defenses and call us out into the open where healing and
growth can take place? Must not love and caregiving also be
therapeutic 	and corrective 	in order to be genuine 	love? Of
course! Those who love us best know this. But not all who love
know how to enter the closed self of another therapeutically.
And where the ordinary therapy of love in community is not
enough, 	an 	extraordinary 	therapy 	is needed, 	a practice 	of
56

-- 57 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	57
extraordinary love and care. This is what professional Christian
caregivers, counselors, and therapists 	strive to be and do.
Our purpose in this chapter is to examine more closely the
role 	of the 	counselor 	in 	helping 	persons 	to grow toward
wholeness. By Roszak' s terms, this is the role that comes close to
violating the integrity if not the sanctity of the personal life of
others. In the modern concept of the professional therapist there
is even more reason to question the value of such a role.
In the healing art, according to one psychiatrist, the doctor can
be seen as the "prescription." 2 Indeed, in the 1950s skeptics of
psychoanalysis 	were 	saying that many neurotic 	patients 	got
better without professional help and that psychotherapy did not
improve on this pattern! H. J. Eysenck, the British psychologist,
unsettled 	the therapeutic 	world with his paper published 	in
1952, "The 	effects of psychotherapy: 	an evaluation." 	Later
Eysenck stated that psychotherapy is like the "wondrous cure"
of the second-century 	physician 	Galen: "All who drink this
remedy recover in a short time, except for those whom it does
not help, 	who all die 	and 	have 	no relief 	from any other
medicine. Therefore, it is obvious that it fails only in incurable
cases." 3
Roger Hurtling, in commenting on this, reports that when
different 	aspects 	of the counseling 	relationship 	were 	being
studied 	some counselors 	and 	psychotherapists 	appeared 	to
facilitate improvement, others did not affect the outcome in any
significant way, and a third category actually seemed to make
the clients 	worse I The focus of inquiry then 	shifted to the
character 	and 	role 	of the 	therapist. 4 Nonetheless, 	Hurtling
suggests, there have always been 	special persons who have
provided the stimulus and direction for growth, though they
were not always recognized as professional caregivers. Caregiv-
ing, he argues, is as essential to human growth and development
as providing physical needs.
With Roszak' s warning in mind and with encouragement from
Hurtling, a thesis can be stated for this chapter: An effective
therapeutic intervention is one in which the client's motive
power to grow is facilitated 	by 	the counselor's perceived
presence as a partner in the growth process.
The anthropological framework for such a thesis has already
been established in the first two chapters. Humans are integra-
tive by nature, with the source of health and therapeutic growth

-- 58 of 257 --

58 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
found in one's own humanity. Openness 	to growth as personal,
social, and spiritual 	life constitutes 	our basic humanity. 	The
presence of the other is essential to this growth process; it is not
an intrusion 	or invasion.
We will discuss this thesis in four stages: (1) growth as a sign
of health; (2) the motive power for growth; (3) the counselor as
the human 	equation 	in therapy; 	and (4) the motive power of
love.
Growth as a Sign of Health
The ambiguity of such terms as health, wholeness, and growth
is a well-known 	problem 	in therapeutic 	literature. 	Clinical
pragmatism, says Allen Bergen, assimilates the dominant values
of a social system 	to help 	define 	the therapeutic 	goals and
clinical procedure. This approach seeks to diminish the patholo-
gies or disturbances 	defined by the clinician, 	who acts as an
agent of culture. Health is seen as the absence of pathology or
the 	removal 	of obstacles 	to 	growth, 	defined 	as 	functional
competence. 	On the other hand, Bergen suggests, humanistic
idealism appeals to philosophical 	and ideal values as inherently
good and necessary to a full human life. The clinician informed
by these 	values determines 	therapeutic 	goals based 	on these
values, which are based on the universal themes of humanity in
the abstract.
In this case, wholeness 	is not defined so much by functional
competence as by movement toward the "healthy" 	goals of ideal
human life. 5 Clinical pragmatism seeks adaptation to the prevail-
ing 	norms 	and 	values 	of the 	immediate 	cultural 	context.
Humanistic 	idealism 	tends 	to ignore 	the 	social and cultural
context in favor of abstract values set forth as norms by which
persons 	should 	measure 	their 	own 	success 	or failure. 	The
pragmatist sacrifices the ideal for the sake of conformity to the
contemporary 	pattern. "Don't 	feel guilty for doing what every-
one else is doing! If you feel better, then you are getting better."
The idealist discounts the value of what is historically 	real for
the sake of conformity to the universal 	ideal. "Don't 	think of
what you are, but what you can be! If you think right, you will
be all right." Of course these are stereotypes! But I suspect that
each 	position 	has 	its 	representatives 	and 	a corresponding
theology, 	even within 	the Christian 	approach 	to counseling.

-- 59 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	59
All therapists would probably agree that therapy is meant to
move a person toward a more integrated and positive approach
to life. The concept of growth or health may be used pragmati-
cally or idealistically to effect change and adjustment to life. Or
we can view growth and health from a more anthropological
perspective, 	such as we have attempted 	to describe 	in the
previous chapter. We believe that this is the way forward.
We certainly can say this: therapeutic gain is essentially a
forward movement 	that 	seeks 	to remove 	obstacles 	to that
movement. Growth as a therapeutic process then becomes more
of a functional term than a term with precise anthropological
content. As Carl Rogers notes, "Therapy is not a matter of doing
something to the individual, or of inducing him to do something
for himsel£ It is instead a matter of freeing him for normal
growth and development, of removing obstacles so that he can
move forward."6 I suspect that Rogers is informed more by
humanistic idealism than clinical pragmatism in his concept of
health. His optimism concerning the inherent value and poten-
tial of the self for growth strongly influences his therapeutic
method. I would agree that growth involves a person's move-
ment toward health, but I would assert that this is also a spiritual
process of dealing with one's need for divine grace.
Howard Clinebell, 	professor of pastoral counseling at the
School of Theology at Claremont, California, is well known for
his theory of "growth counseling." According to Clinebell, 	a
person's 	spiritual 	and personal 	growth includes 	awareness,
decision, freedom, meaning, commitment, quality of spiritual
life, and relation to God. This is a life-long process or "growth
journey" 	that 	never 	reaches 	a fixed goal. Growth 	toward
wholeness is sought in six interdependent aspects: enlivening of
the mind, refreshment 	of the body, enrichment 	of intimate
relationships, rapport with the environment, progress in relating
to institutions as well as others, and enhancement of personal
relationship 	with God.7 Clinebell's 	optimism concerning the
individual's orientation toward growth is only exceeded by his
breadth of reach in defining growth in terms of life's fullest
possibilities! At first glance it appears very much like my own
concept of the life continuum as therapeutic context. What is not
so clear is precisely what anthropological content is given to this
"growth journey."
Professor Newton Malony at the Fuller Seminary Graduate

-- 60 of 257 --

60 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
School of Psychology attempts to integrate personal wholeness
into the larger goals of spiritual holiness by drawing on the
concept of "life environments" 	as depicted 	by T. R. Sargin.
These 	environments 	are physical, 	situational, 	interpersonal,
idealistic, and transcendental. 	"The term whole person," says
Malony, "applies 	to this 	idea. 	To be 	whole 	means 	to be
conscious 	of and 	adequate 	in all, not just 	some, of life's
environments."s
Here we may have a combination of idealistic humanism and
clinical pragmatism! The concept of health or wholeness 	is
determined by a theory of life that includes the transcendental
or religious aspects of the self. Also, functional competence is
defined as being "adequate" in all of the life environments. This
integrative 	model 	has the 	advantage 	of including 	religious
values and goals in the therapeutic process, but it tends to blur
the 	distinction 	between 	clinical 	therapy 	and 	the 	life-long
process of personal and spiritual development. The effective-
ness of this model depends 	on the weight given to the term
adequate. If by adequacy Malony means a relative degree of
effectiveness in integrating each of the components into the life
of the self, then I tend to agree. To function adequately may
only require 	a minimal 	degree 	of competence. 	But if that
competence does not develop beyond "adequate," I am not sure
that we still have "health" 	and 	certainly 	not growth. The
questions remain.
The model we have chosen in this book relies more on a
biblical anthropology than either idealism or pragmatism. The
core paradigm 	of the 	person 	as presented 	in chapter 	2 is
repeated here for our reference.
GOD 	GOD
Physical <GI	pt 	~;~-:e~:;~;; 	i~~~Physical
Psy 	ic~ / 	~~syc 	ical
t Spi 'tual 	, Spi tual
SELF 	SELF
Figure 3

-- 61 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWfH PROMOTER 	61
In this model we may define growth as integrative, relational,
and open to change. The integrative dimension of growth is
measured by the selfs 	movement through the five stages of
development, beginning with the social and ending with the
spiritual. The integrative dimension means more than moving
through 	these 	stages 	"adequately," 	to use 	Malony's term.
Growth is not merely to arrive at any or all of the stages. Rather,
integrative growth is to keep these aspects of the self in balance
and integrated into the function of the self as a person. This
means that there will be congruence between the self as identity
and between the self as experienced in each area. For example,
integrative growth would be recognized by realistic emotions
and feelings at the psychical level fully congruent with the
expression of the self at the sexual and social levels. This aspect
of growth requires continual integrative processing of feelings,
actions, and core identity as an interpretive 	task. Or, as we
discussed in the previous chapter, it represents a therapeutic
redefining of the self when confronted by experiences at any
one of the five levels of personhood.
Bill, a sixteen-year-old high school student, had achieved a
satisfactory level of integrative competence. In moving through
adolescence he maintained healthy relationships with his peers,
learned to handle his strong sexual urges, experienced strongly
bonded relationships with his male friends, felt comfortable in
his earliest dating experiences with girls, and was active in a
campus-centered Bible study and in his church. At this point in
his life his developmental 	and integrative growth in social,
personal, 	sexual, psychical, and 	spiritual 	identity 	appeared
adequate. Now, four years later, not only has his integrative
growth stopped, but he is actually regressing.
After completing high school Bill left home and attended a
college 	where 	he 	was virtually 	unknown 	and 	lacked 	the
continuity of family, church, and friends. What was "adequate"
in terms of integration in high school is now quite inadequate.
The three (ecological) spheres of his life-physical, 	social, and
spiritual-have 	begun to crumble. He suffered a football injury
to his knee that will leave him with a permanent weakness, if
not a disability. His comfortable relation with girls and the
solidarity 	of male 	friends 	with 	whom 	he 	passed 	through
adolescence have now opened up into unknown areas of sexual
intimacy 	with 	expectations 	of life-long commitment. 	Male

-- 62 of 257 --

62 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
friendships are overlaid with competitiveness 	and insecurity.
Philosophical questions intrude into the simplistic assumptions
about a Bible that is to be taken on "faith alone." God seems to
recede into the distance when he is needed the most. A mild
depression and random thoughts of suicide signal Bill's disinte-
gration.
Meanwhile, Bill's physical therapist instructs him in proce-
dures for exercising his knee to prevent further injury and tells
him to stay out of contact sports. Bill also meets once a week
with a counselor to talk about his feelings of alienation and
depression. 	On a visit home he confides in his pastor, who
encourages him to "get back into fellowship with God" through
regular Bible reading and prayer. As a parting thought, the
pastor also suggests that Bill's knee injury might be God's way
of telling him to change his major to religion and think about
going into Christian ministry. Bill never did have the courage to
tell him that he no longer believed in God. Bill has many losses
to grieve; God is only one of them.
In each of the three ecological spheres Bill has a presenting
problem. The physical therapist, psychologist, or pastor each in
one's own way sees Bill primarily in terms of this problem. Each
has counsel to give and a certain professional expertise with
which to approach Bill. But it is Bill himself who will have to
recover the integrative task and begin to move forward through
growth and change. The role of a counselor now becomes much
more than applying therapeutic skills in one of the three spheres
of life. The very core of Bill's personal integration project has
become fragmented as he has moved out of the security of this
early context into his own world. Here is where our model
provides insight into the kind of growth and development that a
person like Bill needs to experience 	in order to recover his
integrative task.
In addition to the integrative growth of the self as depicted in
figure 3, there 	is a dimension 	of relational growth. This is
growth in terms of relationship to others, again with congruence
to the five developmental components-social, 	personal, sexual,
psychical, and spiritual. 	For example, as he has developed
sexually, integrating his sexual feelings with his personal, social,
and spiritual identity, Bill has also encountered other people in
each of these 	areas. In these 	new relationships 	he is very
vulnerable. Suddenly he experiences for the first time the shock

-- 63 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTHPROMOTER 	63
of being alone with himself. The easy familiarity with which he
experienced himself as a social, personal, sexual, psychical, and
spiritual being is no longer present now that the familiar context
is gone. The others whom he encounters move quickly from
being strangers to being roommates, classmates, or drinking
mates, with little time for exploring the history and context of
the self. He is drawn to others or repelled 	by them, like a
magnetic force. He dares not allow the psychic pain of loneli-
ness and grief over a loss to intrude into the camaraderie of
social life in the dormitory. The psychic, social, and sexual
become compartmentalized within Bill because his encounters
with others are primarily one-dimensional. Bill is increasing the
tempo and intensity of his life, but is losing the inner connec-
tedness.
As a case in point, in his first experiences of intimacy with
females outside the familiar structures of his family, friends, and
male companions, Bill may find the physical immediacy of
sexual encounter a powerful funnel through which he can pour
his social, personal, 	psychical, and even 	spiritual 	needs 	in
search of fulfillment. But what feels like integration of the self
actually becomes disintegration. What is experienced as inti-
macy and closeness actually becomes a complicated negotiation
of meeting needs while maintaining distance. Growth stops,
integration fragments, and the self desperately seeks compensa-
tory strategies to survive. Bill radically changes his personality
and lifestyle. But this is change without growth, progression
without development, 	and fusion without integration.
By telling the story of Bill, we have fleshed out the schematic
model of integrative 	growth as a sign of movement toward
health. The growth of the self is both integrative and relational.
Bill experienced the first, but lost it when he failed to make
relational growth. Relational growth as measured by this model
of personhood is simultaneously integrative growth with respect
to the selfs congruence with itself in all areas. Here, too, growth
will be expressed as therapeutic redefinition, or interpretation,
as relationships constantly present new experiences of the self
and others.
Openness to change lies at the very heart of growth. When-
ever a person is open to change, there 	is growth potential.
However, change alone is not necessarily growth, for change
may merely be alteration in behavior without the two dimen-

-- 64 of 257 --

64 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
sions of growth discussed above. We saw clearly in Bill's case
that growth must be both integrative and relational. Growth
begins with openness 	to change; without it, integrative and
relational growth simply cannot occur. The forward movement
of growth toward health has anthropological content and charac-
ter, as our model suggests. It is realistic, not merely idealistic;
transformative, not merely adaptive and pragmatic.
Here, then, is our definition of growth as a sign of health:
• 	The development 	of the self in terms of core identity,
integrating 	the 	social, personal, 	sexual, psychical, 	and
spiritual;
• 	The relatedness of the self to others in such a way that the
core integration remains intact;
• 	Openness to change as a condition of integrative growth
and as the basis of therapeutic 	growth toward health.
The Motive Power for Growth
Effecting 	change 	in the 	personality 	dynamics 	of another
person constantly challenges the therapeutic 	skills of a coun-
selor or pastor. Sometimes pathology seems to be the most
stable condition 	of all organic life. Resistance to change is
rooted in the very nature of pathological structures. A neurosis is
cunning and highly adaptable, able to make adjustments with
computerlike 	speed 	to retain its own set of defenses. 	This
instinctive adaptability can easily deceive the unwary counselor
into thinking that growth is occurring when actually the patient
has only adjusted his or her behavior to relieve therapeutic
stress.
In a public lecture in the late 1960s the psychiatrist Viktor
Frankl told of his transition from psychoanalytic therapy to what
came to be called logotherapy. "I discovered that many patients
were unwilling to terminate therapy, even after long periods,"
said Frankl, "because they lacked a positive will to meaning in
their life. The thing that they feared the most was being well.
Their sickness at least gave them a project on which they could
focus their attention." Frankl's existentially oriented psychology
led 	him 	to 	develop 	what 	he 	called 	a 	"psychotherapeutic
anthropology" that precedes 	all psychotherapy. 9 What Frankl
saw as untapped in the traditional psychotherapy was the role of

-- 65 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	65
the human spirit in positing a "will to meaning." 	This move-
ment of the spirit can be understood as the core motive of the
self in growth and openness 	to change.
The function of spirit as essential to the life and power of the
person is consistently depicted in the Bible as a life force that
issues out of the "heart," 	or the inner life of the person. One
cannot cut away the life of the spirit as a "religious appendix"
that serves no necessary function. "This means that the spirit
must be distinguished 	from the soul or psyche," writes theolo-
gian Helmut 	Thielicke. 	"It 	must not be psychologically 	or
psychopathologically 	derived from the psyche."10
The heart in biblical psychology appears to be the source and
center of the person's imagination, intentions, will, and actions.
Indeed, when the heart has become evil, then all of a person's
thoughts and actions become sick and "unholy," 	or "unclean"
(cf. Prov. 4:23; 6:18). David asks God not to remove his Holy
Spirit from him and to create in him a new heart (Ps. 51:10-11).
Jesus reminds his disciples that one does not become "unclean"
through that which enters into the self; instead, what comes out
of the self, out of the heart, makes one unclean: 	"For from
within, out of the heart of man, come evil thoughts, fornication,
theft, 	murder, 	adultery, 	coveting, 	wickedness, 	deceit, 	licen-
tiousness, envy, slander, pride, foolishness" (Mark 7:21-22). In
the same way, one is responsible 	to "keep 	one's heart," 	for
"from it How the springs of life" (Prov. 4:23). The source of the
heart's positive and "healthy" 	motivations comes from a "new
and right spirit" (Ps. 51:10).
What the 	Hebrew 	language 	meant 	when 	referring 	to the
"heart" (Zeb)as the center and source oflife, is what is meant by
the psycho-spiritual 	dynamics of the sel£ The way a person
"thinks" 	in this construct is not separated from who one is or
how one feels. Rather, the conceptual 	and cognitive 	life is
linked with the feelings, instincts, and motives of the person as
embodied soul and ensouled body. The "heart" is expressed in
actions that reveal motives and intentions. It is the core of the
self in the most fundamental 	and comprehensive 	sense. The
biblical concept of the heart is close to what I earlier called the
"soul" as the core or center of the self. I thinkthat the Greek
word psyche as used in the New Testament can also be seen as
representing 	this center of the life of the self.
When considered 	from this anthropological 	perspective, 	the

-- 66 of 257 --

66 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
self is inner driven, not stimulus-response controlled. There is a
stimulus-response 	factor that 	is appropriate 	to each of the
subsystems of the self, by which certain changes in behavior can
be produced. Specific therapeutic gains can often be produced
through an intervention that makes use of this dynamic. But
when we seek the motive power for growth as openness to
change, we must probe deeper into the self than the psyche, as
Frankl has reminded us. It is the self as spirit that integrates the
various facets of personhood and produces openness to change.
How is the human spirit encountered therapeutically so as to
release motive power for change and growth? In Dynamics in
Pastoring, a work that has already become a standard reference
in the field of pastoral theology, the Dutch scholar Jacob Firet
offers us a model.11 Firet's concern is for what he calls role
fulfillment for the pastor. Because pastoral care is part of this
task, what Firet says can also be applied to the entire continuum
of counseling as we have understood it in this book. For it is in
the dynamics of the growing and changing person that a ministry
of the Word of God is made effective.
Firet distinguishes between the "hermeneutic moment" as a
moment of understanding 	and the "agogic moment" 	as the
moment of change and growth. What does this mean? We have
already discussed the formation of the self as a hermeneutical
task. That is, it is the task of reinterpreting the self therapeutical-
ly through encounter with new events and experiences. When
we hear an idea or come to understand a concept in such a way
that the new is assimilated into our already existing core of
knowledge, we have the "aha!" experience. "Now I see what
you are getting at!" is often the response when we are trying to
make a point.
Many times one can listen to a sermon, to good advice, or to a
therapist's comments and have the feeling, "I understand that. It
makes sense. I see what you mean and I agree." Yet one can go
away without changing the pattern of behavior that contradicts
the wisdom and truth of what has been understood. No real
change and growth have occurred. But Firet emphasizes that
God's Word intends to effect change and growth, not merely to
produce new information or new concepts in the mind. This is
why the pastoral caregiver must go beyond the "hermeneutic
moment" to the "agogic moment."
While the concept of pedagogy is familiar to us, the word

-- 67 of 257 --

fflE COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	67
agogy is more recent and less familiar. Agogy, which basically
means "guidance," describes a situation in which a person is not
merely "addressed" 	or "talked at," but actually encountered in
such a way that there is "guidance from one kind of action to
another." Through the intermediary role of the counselor, an
"agogic moment" can occur. "It is a motive force which activates
the person on whom it is focused, so that that person begins to
change." 12 What I earlier 	called 	the 	integrative 	process 	of
growth is close to what Firet means by the term "agogic." It is
growth produced in the self by the guidance (agogy) of another.
Firet 	warns 	against 	construing 	this 	kind 	of guidance 	as
"nurture," because nurture presupposes an "ideal type" toward
which the nurturer guides the person. As soon as a nurturing
guidance becomes intentional, the person may stop growing and
may wrongly depend on the nurturer as the actual power that
produces change. In contrast to nurture, the agogic situation
believes that the motive power for change lies within the client,
not in the counselor. The counselor merely mediates that power
and facilitates the growth process.
Let us define this process more fully. The "agogic situation,"
or growth process, is a human and personal encounter, whether
ordinary or extraordinary, that releases a motive power that
generates change. This change opens up the constricted world
of the one who lives only marginally. The constricted person
develops 	into a self-directed 	and fully functional 	participant 	in
community, and his or her narrow self is expanded to a larger
and more authentic existence. For example, in the case of Bill, a
counselor who is herself an integrated and growing person can
intervene into his "closed" self and become the agent of change
and growth for him. A counselor who understands the power of
grief to heal can guide Bill in the process of grieving his lost
physical prowess (the injured knee). She can release in him a
new motive power to intregrate this loss into his life and so
transform it from something alien to part of his "story." The
point at which this transformation occurs is what Firet means by
the "agogic moment."
Firet 	describes 	three 	components 	in the agogic situation.
First, a motive power comes into the situation in the form of a
word, address, or symbolic action; second, another person acts
as an intermediary for this motive power; and third an effect is
marked by change and growth.ta The Holy Spirit comes directly

-- 68 of 257 --

68 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
to persons as movement on the human spirit, suggests Firet. The
motive power that enters the agogic situation comes from God as
the source of human life itself. Yet persons recognize the effect
of growth and change in a new motivation that is truly their own.
We see an example in David's expressing in a psalm, "Put a
new and right spirit within me" (Ps. 51:10). Here David is
referring to his relationship with Bathsheba and the killing of
her husband. When the prophet Nathan confronts David about
these sins, he creates the "agogic situation" by telling a story of
a rich man who took the only sheep of a poor man to feed a
stranger. David says, "The man •.. 	deserves to die." Nathan
responds, "You are the man!" David acknowledges the truth: "I
have 	sinned." 	Nathan then 	gives the 	final word of grace,
indicating that change and growth have occurred: "You shall not
die" 	(2 Sam. 	12:13). All three 	components 	of the 	agogic
situation are present. A motive power released in David allows
him to integrate his own terrible deed and accept God's grace
and forgiveness; Nathan acts as an intermediary, having earned
the right to confront David in this way; and Psalm 51 testifies to
the effect produced in David's life.
How do we recognize that an agogic moment or situation has
occurred? Because the agogic moment affects the life, attitude,
and behavior of the person, we can only recognize the moment
after it has occurred. A client may come to a therapy session and
say, "I could hardly wait to get here to tell you this. I woke up
this morning and something was different. The feeling of that
awful burden that I had been carrying was simply gone. I can't
explain it, but I feel different." The counselor herself may not
be aware of any precise moment in the previous sessions when a
breakthrough occurred. There were, to be sure, times when the
client seemed to gain new insight and when the therapeutic
interpretation 	seemed accurate. But these were only "herme-
neutic moments" with no immediate relief or change. Still,
therapeutic insight and interpretation are valuable contributions
to the therapeutic process. The agogic moment ordinarily does
not happen without such insight.
In contrast to therapeutic insight, the agogic moment actually
releases motive power to begin change and growth. The agogic
moment requires above all an encounter between the "growth
promoter" and the client that is fully human on both sides.
There must be real parity between the one who hears and the

-- 69 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	69
one who speaks, between the one who counsels and the one
who is counseled. This encounter is what Firet calls the "pre-
agogic" situation; it means that "all action toward a human
being with a view to his or her humanization has its starting
point in dealing with a particular person as a human being."14
Although the counseling 	relationship 	clearly differentiates
between 	the 	therapist 	and 	client, 	the 	therapist 	(or growth
promoter) must overcome this disparity and create an environ-
ment for the agogic situation. Says Firet, "The growth promoter
who does not enter the relationship as equal, does not enter the
relationship: he not only does not come close to the other; he
cannot even maintain distance; he is simply not there."is The
concepts of "being there" and "distance" suggest a therapeutic
relation 	in 	which 	both 	the 	speaker 	and 	hearer, 	both 	the
counselor and the counselee, are mutually defined through the
encounter at the core level of human selfhood. This is more than
a therapeutic 	strategy to gain confidence. It is an essential
component of the process that produces growth and change as a
therapeutic 	outcome.
Let us review what we have said about the motive power for
growth:
• 	Resistance to change must be overcome by releasing a
motive power from within the self;
• The motive power to change lies within the self in the form
of "spirit" or "soul"; in this "center" the self thinks, wills,
and feels;
• The self is inner-driven, not stimulus-response controlled;
• The 	motive power of the 	self is released 	through 	the
encounter and guidance of another as agent of change;
• This encounter, 	called the 	"agogic moment," 	produces
change by
-releasing 	motive power within the self,
-relying 	on the guidance of another person,
-producing 	an actual effect of growth in the person.
The Counselor as the Human Equation in Therapy
Our focus in this chapter 	is on the counselor as growth
promoter. Our thesis is that an effective therapeutic intervention
is one in which the client's motive power to grow is facilitated

-- 70 of 257 --

70 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
by the counselor's perceived presence as a partner in the growth
process. We have looked at the process of growth and change
using Firet' s terminology of the agogic moment. Instead of using
this technical term, I will simply call it the "growth process." I
will continue to assume that the threefold process of growth
includes a release of motive power, the role of the counselor as
intermediary, and a perceived effect of change and growth in the
counselee.
The people who face each other in the counseling room have
names. They have personal histories. They are somehow always
vulnerable. 	They can be offended and hurt. Or they can be
respected 	and granted the benefit of the doubt as mysterious
beings, 	not capable 	of being 	resolved 	into a problem 	or a
profession. They all have feelings as well as faces. They all have
hopes and dreams as well as failings and fears. All of this,
though it be unspoken, constantly attends the encounter of the
counselor and the client and cries out that this relationship, too,
despite the urgency of divine address or the misery of human
need and weakness, demands that this humanity be recognized,
affirmed, and cared for.
This could be mere rhetoric and sentimentality if it were not
also fundamentally true and if the issues at stake were not so
crucial.
The Swiss psychiatrist Paul Toumier is well known for his
therapeutic distinction between "person" 	and "personage," as
well as his emphasis on the humanity of the therapist. He urges
us to bring the "personage into harmony with the person," not
by looking inward "where the true nature of the person always
eludes us," but by turning outward "towards the world, towards
our neighbor, towards God." The "personage" 	is what others
experience through our actions and presence; the "person" 	is
who we actually are. This inner "person," Toumier says, is the
real person who must be disclosed in order to overcome the
personage.
Toumier found through his own therapeutic experience that
"confession" on the part of the therapist often lessens a client's
resistance to growth. He tells of a case in which he counseled a
woman for weeks without progress. She had been referred to
him by a colleague. In a time of prayer, Toumier discovered that
he had been overconcemed with "being too much successful"
in the eyes of his colleague. He shared this insight with his

-- 71 of 257 --

THE COUNSELORAS GROWI'HPROMOTER 	71
patient 	and 	discovered 	that the 	atmosphere 	between 	them
improved 	considerably. 16 This 	is an example of what Firet
means 	by 	"parity" 	between 	the 	counselor 	and 	counselee.
Humanization must occur for there to be actual growth, and it
occurs most effectively when the counselor engages the other as
the person she or he is.
When we considered 	the anthropological basis for growth
earlier in this chapter, we reproduced 	the core paradigm of
personhood as developed in :figure 3. From this perspective we
defined growth as integrative, 	relational, and being open to
change. This provides a more substantive basis for understand-
ing what growth toward health means. Growth is not merely
change, 	but the 	enhancement 	and 	enlargement 	of the 	self
through integration. Change in behavior does not always mean
change and growth at the integrative level.
Referring again to :figure 3, we note that the construct of the
self as related to the other constitutes 	core humanity 	itsel£
Therapeutic 	intervention 	into the core humanity 	of another
therefore requires that an approach be made "humanly" and not
merely 	"technically" 	or "professionally." 	The technical 	and
professional training and skills that the counselor must bring to
the therapy session can also be introduced through his or her
own presence 	in the encounter as a person.
This does not violate the integrity or freedom of the counse-
lee's "self," because the freedom and growth of the self are
oriented toward the other person. That is to say, growth is not
only integrative with respect to the selfs congruence with itself
in each of the levels of personhood, but it is also growth through
relatedness 	to other selves. In fact, as Firet correctly states,
change and growth only occur when this encounter takes place
as part of the "agogic moment." For such a relationship to be
effective, says Firet, a person must tum to another in trust to let
her participate in the process of her own change and growth. A
relationship can only produce this growth when mutual trust is
engendered. 	In this encounter 	there must be a presence 	of
"authority," 	not 	in the 	sense 	of a hierarchy 	of psychical,
physical, technical, or even spiritual expertise, but in the sense
of actually being an auctor, a "promoter of the prosperity" of a
life in the process of becoming.11
By restating our basic thesis for this chapter, we can empha-
size this point more clearly: an effective therapeutic interoen-

-- 72 of 257 --

72 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
tion is one in which the client•s motive power to grow is
facilitated by the counselor•s perceived presence as a partner in
the growth 	process. The 	effectiveness 	lies 	in 	the 	client's
perceiving the counselor as a growth partner.
Even as the knife of a surgeon can cut but cannot heal, the
psychic scalpel of the therapist can expose an atrophied and
deformed human spirit, but cannot implant the power to trust,
love, and act in faith. Most of us learn to trust and love and come
to faith without extraordinary means of intervention. We sup-
pose that we have a certain autonomy of selfhood because we
have not had to surrender to the care of a professional therapist.
But this is self-deception. From the beginning, we have had the
personal space of our lives invaded by "growth promoters"! Yet
we did not mind. We responded openly and freely to those who
became partners in our own growth and development. But what
we experienced ordinarily and somewhat routinely is the same
thing that some of us need in a special and extraordinary sense
when the process of growth and change stops. It is when we
become stuck that we need the intervention of a skilled "growth
promoter."
In these therapeutic situations, the "growth process" (agogic
moment) begins with encounter in which the counselor medi-
ates the "power that motivates growth" directly and discerning-
ly. The counselor's therapeutic skill provides the discernment
and precision to mediate the power accurately. Hence we can
appreciate 	the value of intensive 	training as a psychologist,
therapist, or pastoral counselor. These people need all their
skills and knowledge in their ministry of mediating the motive
power that produces change and growth. This motive power is
love.
The role of the counselor as growth promoter can be summa-
rized as follows:
• 	Counselors are open to the real humanity of their counse-
lees, and this is perceived by the counselees;
• 	Counselors are present in the counseling situation so as to
reveal their own humanity;
• The core humanity of each person is structurally open to
the 	other; 	thus 	the 	counselor 	does 	not 	"invade" 	the
counselee but is present as a growth partner.

-- 73 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	73
The Motive Power of Love
The power that motivates persons can be indiscriminate and
even destructive. In its most positive sense this power may be
viewed as a "self-actualizing" potential in which the drive to
move through basic human needs to higher needs is considered
the motivating force in therapy (e.g., Abraham Maslow). In more
Freudian terms, this power may be viewed as blind libidinous
instinct or craving that needs to be connected to positive and
healthy 	ego needs 	through 	analysis and transference 	(e.g.,
Melanie Klein). Or, it may be viewed in a more mystical sense
as a kind of "daimonic" impulse or drive, which can be either
destructive or creative (e.g., Rollo May). In behavioristic psy-
chology, power is not an attribute of the self, but a phenomenon
of stimulus-response mechanism. The power to produce change
lies almost totally with the stimulus (e.g., B. F. Skinner).
All these concepts of power as a therapeutic resow:ce tend to
be individualistic 	and phenomenological. That is, they seek
sources for altering a person's behavior within the personality
itself or, in the case of behaviorism, totally outside the personal-
ity.
In the anthropological model we are using, power is not
simply a person's need, craving, or search for creativity. Nor is
power totally outside the person. The power of selfhood is
"response 	power." 	The image of God as a divine 	endowment
posits a power of "response-in-kind" as the essential motivation
of persons. In the biblical story of creation, Adam, the solitary
male, is "powerless" to change and grow even though he has
"control" over his environment, can name the animals, and hear
God's commands and obey them. What is lacking is what I call
"response-in-kind" 	power. The biblical text says that Adam
lacked a "partner" or "helper," or "one corresponding to him,"
as the Hebrew word literally says (Gen. 2:18). With the creating
and positioning of the other person as one whom he could
encounter directly, Adam became "empowered" to respond out
of the depth of himself to one who had the power to encounter
him as such. This response-in-kind 	empowerment 	links the
motivating power of the self as the source of change and growth
to human encounter and relationship.
Whereas 	God's 	address 	and 	command to Adam did 	not
empower him in this way, the encounter with the other human

-- 74 of 257 --

74 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
did. This, of course, is precisely what the creation story means to
tell us. God and human personhood are as unalike as they are
alike. The divine image does not lie solely between God and an
individual human, but also in the relationship of persons. The
quality of this relationship is indeed grounded in the motive
power of God's own love-this 	is what the image of God means
to convey as a material gift of human empowerment. 	In the
human encounter of one with the other, the core motivation of
the self to love is released as response-in-kind.
We now have the answer to Roszak's charge that the person-
hood of one is violated by the intervention 	of another. The
problem is not an ethical one, as Roszak seems to assume, but an
anthropological one. If people are structurally open to the other
as necessary to the growth and integration of the self, then love
that seeks the other's growth and health is not an invasion, but a
prompter. Christians who counsel from this perspective make
interventions humanly, not merely professionally. This is all the
more important to remember for those who have spiritual and
pastoral motivations in counseling.
Love is a motivating power only for God and for those who
bear his image. "We love," says the apostle, "because he first
loved us" (1 John 4:19). We are urged to love one another
because "love is of God, and he who loves is born of God and
knows God" (4:7). Also, "if we love one another, God abides in
us and his love is perfected in us" (4:12).
Clearly, such love as a motivating power for growth is more
than an affection or an "attitude." All human expressions of love
should seek growth, in oneself and in the other. This requires
the "real presence" 	of the other, in both word and deed. The
person who releases love as the motive power is open to change,
which means open to the Spirit of God as the source of renewal,
growth, and change. A counselor who is cautious and closed to
this spiritual openness as a dynamic of the therapeutic encoun-
ter has already sacrificed the greater possibility of empower-
ment for growth to the lesser goal of therapeutic efliciency. 18
When Jesus commissioned his disciples to minister the reality
of the kingdom of God, he sent them out without title 	or
professional status. He sent them out in the same form in which
he himself was present in the world-becoming 	human for the
sake of the salvation of humans. "Whenever you enter a town
and they receive you, eat what is set before you; heal the sick in

-- 75 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWI'H PROMOTER 	75
it and say to them, 'The kingdom of God has come near to you' "
(Luke 10:9; c£ also Luke 17:21; Matt. 10:7).19
Summary
In this chapter we have argued the thesis that an effective
therapeutic 	intervention 	is one in which the client's motive
power 	to grow is facilitated 	by the 	counselor's 	perceived
presence as a partner in the growth process.
• We defined growth as integrative, relational, and openness
to change;
• We examined the concept of the agogic moment as the
release of the motive power to change;
• We sought to understand the role of the counselor as a
partner in the growth process;
• We discovered that God's love seeks its fulfillment in the
human task of growth and that this saving and sanctifying
love is released through the reciprocal love experienced
between the counselor and the client in the therapeutic
encounter.
This love is not treason or treachery committed against the
human self. It liberates, empowers, and enriches personal life.
Christians who counsel are sent with this gracious permission
and commission. 	It is indeed 	a high calling.
Notes
1. Theodore Roszak, Person/Planet (Garden City, N.Y.: Double-
day/Anchor, 1979), 139.
2. Michael Balint, The Doctor, His Patient and 	the Illness
(Marshfield, Md.: Pitman, 1957),5: cited by Roger Hurding, The Tree of
Healing (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1988), 188.
3. Cited by Hurtling, The Tree of Healing, 28-29.
4. Ibid.
5. Allen E. Bergen, "Psychotherapy and Religious Values," in
Wholeness and Holiness: Readings in the Psychology/Theology of
Mental Health, ed. H. Newton Malony (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983),
306£.
6. Carl Rogers, Counseling and Psychotherapy (Boston: Houghton
Miffiin, 1942), 29.
7. Howard Clinebell, Basic Types of Pastoral Care and Counseling
(London: SCM Press, 1984), 31-34. See also, "Growth Counseling," in

-- 76 of 257 --

76 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Helping People Grow, ed. Gary Collins (Ventura, Cali£: Vision House,
1980).
8. H. Newton Malony, ed., Wholeness and Holiness: Readings in the
Psychology/Theology of Mental Health (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983),
20-21.
9. Donald F. Tweedie, Jr., Logotherapy: An Evaluation ofFrankl's
Existential Approach to Psychotherapy (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1961),
35. For further reading in the concept oflogotherapy, see Viktor Frankl,
The Unconscious God: Psychotherapy and Theology (London: Hodder
and Stoughton, 1977); Man's Search for Meaning: An Introduction to
Logotherapy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1959); The Doctor and the Soul:
From Psychotherapy to Logotherapy (New York: Alfred A. Knopf:
1955).
10. Helmut Thielicke, Being Human .•• Becoming Human (New
York: Doubleday, 1984), 446.
11. Jacob Firet, Dynamics in Pastoring (Het agogisch Moment in het
pastoraal Optreden), trans. John Vriend (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1986), esp. 99ff.
12. Ibid., 101.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid., 161 (emphasis in original).
15. Ibid., 165 (emphasis in original).
16. Paul Toumier, The Meaning of Persons (London: SCM Press,
1957), 35-36: cited by Hurtling, The Tree of Healing, 330.
17. Firet, Dynamics in Pastoring, 112.
18. Charles Gerkin comments perceptively on the ..gap" between the
self and the other that must be interpreted 	positively from the
perspective of object relations theory when he says: "Thus a gap is
formed between the self and the mother as well as the self and God,
and this gap must be interpreted. This interpretation comprises the task
of the life of the soul as seen theologically as it comprises the task of the
self as we have seen it from the psychological perspective of object
relations theory. But, as in the analogous relationship with the earthly
mother, this task of sustaining the life of the self or soul is not simply an
autonomous activity. Rather the life of the soul is facilitated by God,
who both asserts otherness and mirrors the deepest longings of the
human spirit" (The Living Human Document [Nashville: Abingdon,
1984], 95).
19. The Roman Catholic theologian Hans Urs von Balthasar ex-
presses the case for salvation as present healing in the midst of
continuing imperfection when he says, "Thus man, healed and made
whole in the salvation of God, and thus in this simple basic sense holy,
rests in a mysterious suspension he does not himself understand and
which on that very account is strangely exhilarating. He is clearly aware

-- 77 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS GROWTH PROMOTER 	77
of earthly imperfectibility, 	which does not become for him the
oppressive prison. The thought of having to perfect himself at any cost
does not become an obsession. Knowing of the house built up in grace
for him with God, he can cheerfully inhabit his tumbledown hut and
free himself through time" (A Theological Anthropology [New York:
Sheed and Ward, 1967), 101).
This may be one way of expressing the relation of wholeness to
holiness, but one should also be careful not to let it become permission
to leave persons in untherapeutic environments with only spiritual
assurances as a form of comfort. This would be to give a stone when a
child asks for bread!

-- 78 of 257 --



-- 79 of 257 --

PART TWO
SPIRITUAL 	DYNAMICS
IN COUNSELING

-- 80 of 257 --



-- 81 of 257 --

4
The Kingdom of God as
Therapeutic 	Context
As we turn our focus to spiritual dynamics in counseling, we
need 	to clarify the 	context 	and 	culture 	that 	bear 	on the
therapeutic interventions made by Christian psychologists and
therapists. What we have called the "growth process" (agogic
moment) involves a process of change and development of the
client in a therapeutic 	relationship. There is an "ecological"
dimension to the self that involves relationship to others as well
as to God. This necessarily entails a social and cultural context
in which the change takes place.
S. L. Halleck writes in The Politics of Therapy, "There 	is no
way in which the psychiatrist can deal with behavior that is
partly generated by a social system without either strengthening
or altering that system. Every encounter 	with a psychiatrist,
therefore, has political implications." 1
This was certainly true for Jesus! The religious authorities
condemned his healing of the man blind from birth (John 9)
because it occurred on the Sabbath. Jesus' healing challenged a
social and religious system that tolerated the sick and deformed
to preserve its institutional life. On one occasion, when con-
fronted with a man having a paralyzed arm, Jesus challenged the
authorities with a question: "Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do
good or to do harm?" (Mark 3:4). When they did not reply, he
immediately healed the man. This healing directly challenged
the prevailing ethical and religious culture of Jesus' society.
Often 	he 	explicitly 	commanded 	those 	healed 	from mental
illness to return to their homes and communities and there
81

-- 82 of 257 --

82 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
testify of their healing as a sign that the kingdom of God had
manifested 	its power (Mark 5:19).
Therapeutic gains do not occur in a cultural or social vacuum.
Christians who counsel are keenly aware of this-too 	keenly
aware, in many cases, for their own comfort. They realize that
they cannot intervene 	therapeutically 	without a· conscious or
unconscious intention to help the client adapt to his or her own
cultural context. The very fact that a person seeks therapy or is
urged by others to seek help indicates some degree of cultural
and social maladaptation. "Implicit in every therapy is a theory
of culture," 	suggests Alvin Dueck.2
From a Christian perspective, 	the issue of a cultural theory
with regard to therapeutic 	goals becomes critical. The coun-
selor's attempts to extend therapeutic 	gain to include 	growth
toward specific personal and religious values and goals could be
viewed as inappropriate 	or even "unethical" 	from the perspec-
tive of secular culture.
The social and cultural context that the client brings to the
growth process will affect the process in at least two ways. First,
any growth or change in the client will require integration back
into the culture and context from which the client is coming.
This often involves therapeutically redefining one's identity and
relationship to that culture. But failure to make this integrative
movement will leave the client alienated from the only culture
he or she knows.
Second, the culture that the therapist brings to the situation
will affect the growth process in some way. The long-range
"growth goals" as negotiated between the therapist and client
may require modifying the culture of either the client or the
therapist. When the culture of the Christian counselor includes
values and goals assumed to be essential to human health and
wholeness as theologically defined, there may be a confronta-
tion of cultures 	in working 	out the 	therapeutic 	goals. The
counselor will have to determine how far these growth goals can
be made 	part of the therapeutic 	goals without 	making this
confrontation disruptive and nontherapeutic. 	Even Jesus could
not do more for some people 	than 	to provide 	mental 	and
physical healing. Beyond that he urged the transformation of the
culture itself to provide a context for growth (as seen in the
Sermon on the Mount, Matt. 5- 7).
When a Christian 	counselor 	has a client 	who is suffering

-- 83 of 257 --

fflE KINGDOM OF GOD AS mERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	83
mental and emotional abuse in a marriage relationship and the
other partner in the marriage will not respond to therapeutic
intervention, a separation or even divorce may result. Counsel-
ing an alcoholic to sobriety will greatly affect the client's marital
or family relationship. If a codependerit is involved, that person,
unable to sustain a relationship with a recovering alcoholic, may
leave. The counselor's own values and cultural framework will
be influenced as well. Therapeutic gains are social and cultural
realities that affect both counselor and counselee. For Christians
who counsel, the biblical theme of the kingdom of God provides
a therapeutic context in which to consider these factors.
In this section we are shifting the focus from therapy as a
process of integrative growth to the environment of therapeutic
gain. This environment is, in fact, the culture in which both the
therapist and the client exist. The culture is the particular ethos,
worldview, 	values, 	and 	common 	language-among 	other
things-that 	make up the context of individuals.
Christians describe this culture as the kingdom of God, a
theme that runs throughout Scripture. We will look first at the
culture of the kingdom of God with respect to counseling goals,
and then at three specific themes of the kingdom: righteousness,
wisdom, and community.
The Kingdom of God and Counseling Goals
The concept of the kingdom of God is central to the Judeo-
Christian tradition. The kingdom is a social reality over which
and through which God exercises his power and presence,
rather than merely a realm over which he reigns. God promised
a land, but he established a people before he gave them a land.
The kingdom of God is a culture that takes form in world
culture. That is to say, there is a culture unique to a society and
people whose personal, social, and religious life is oriented to
this particular God who makes covenant with them. But this
kingdom culture only exists as a particular form of "world
culture." The cultural matrix of the Semitic people, descended
from Shem, a son of Noah, became the world culture in which
the kingdom culture took form.
However, no essential 	language, race, sexual role, ethnic
origin, or worldview belongs to the culture of the kingdom of
God. This was not made clear in the Old Testament, although it

-- 84 of 257 --

84 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
was implicit in the original covenant promise to Abraham- 	"By
you all the families of the earth shall bless themselves" 	(Gen.
12:3)-and 	was quite explicit in the prophecy of Joel- 	"I will
pour out my spirit on all flesh; your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy ... " (Joel 2:28).
The relativity of all world cultures became clear through the
incarnation, 	death, 	and 	resurrection 	of Jesus 	of Nazareth.
Though Jesus was born a male Jew and was socialized into the
Palestinian culture of the first century, his resurrection and the
sending of his Spirit fulfilled the prophecy of Joel and broke
down the wall of cultural particularity as a criterion of the
kingdom of God (cf. Eph. 2:14-22; 	Gal. 3:26-29).
Let me repeat the point: The kingdom of God is a culture with
its own social and religious life that takes form in existing world
cultures. This culture of the kingdom uses existing cultural
forms and corrects and adapts these forms to the content and
reality of the kingdom of God. The kingdom of God understood
in this way has a therapeutic 	aim that seeks the health and
wholeness of individuals in the context of the community that
provides their core identity. God enters into the personal, social,
and historical life of people in order to release a motive power
for wholeness (shalom), righteousness, faith, and love of God
and neighbor. This is what we have called the growth process.
This is a critical insight for Christians who counsel. It means
especially that the context of each person's life is not alien to the
culture 	of the kingdom of God. People can be accepted 	as
persons in the social context in which they live. This means that
Christian counselors can authentically relate to non-Christians
at this 	level. 	The 	kingdom 	of God does 	not discriminate
between those who believe in God and those who do not, but
treats each person as someone created in the divine image and
as an object of God's love and care. This also means, however,
that the kingdom of God works from within the existing social
and cultural 	matrix of each person 	to bring liberation 	and
healing, especially in the forms inflicted by that person's own
social setting. The kingdom of God is not primarily a religious
culture, but a power that liberates and frees persons within their
existing culture to experience the "human" culture that belongs
by right of God's creation to each person.
No longer 	are 	individuals 	oppressed 	by impersonal 	and
tyrannical world powers; they are liberated (as in the Exodus) to

-- 85 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	85
become a new people whose social relationships become the
source of personal identity and power becomes transformed into
covenant love.
No longer are people 	subject to the blind and capricious
powers of nature; they are aligned with the power of a creator
God who intervenes into these natural forces and sustains the
fragile life of his own people.
No longer are people possessed by powers and spirits that
defile and destroy; they are filled and directed by the good and
holy Spirit of God.
No longer do moral failure, outbreak of cruelty, and break-
down of family leave hopeless victims and unmediated guilt;
the same God who demands holiness in life and action provides
atonement, healing, and restoration through rituals of forgive-
ness and renewal.
With God incarnated through Jesus of Nazareth, this culture of
the kingdom became a living power and presence through his
person and ministry. Through the calling of the twelve disci-
ples, Jesus reconstitutes the kingdom community and culture.
He delivers the ethical mandate of the kingdom as the Sermon
on the Mount and invites everyone, without discrimination, to
enter the kingdom. The conflict occurs between the culture of
the kingdom and the prevailing culture of religious Judaism,
where the concerns for justice, forgiveness, righteousness, and
healing have been forgotten.
Jesus did not specialize in individual therapy as a clinical
procedure-though 	he did not tum away from offering such
help. 	His concern was for the growth goals that belong to
persons 	as created 	in the 	divine 	image. He called for the
integration of the entire self and pointed to the healing and
purifying power of the inner life directed outward toward others
and toward God. He demanded the integration of religious truth
with social concern. He sought the integration of prayer with
feeding 	the 	hungry 	and 	healing 	the 	sick. He 	enacted 	the
integration of social unity over the barriers of racial, sexual, and
religious discrimination.
Jesus left no person standing in the spot where they were
healed, but either sent them back to be integrated with their
own people again, as a sign of the kingdom of God, or called
them as followers into the new community of the kingdom.
This understanding 	of the kingdom provides a context for

-- 86 of 257 --

86 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
developing an approach to therapy from a Christian perspective.
The kingdom of God is a therapeutic context that offers, as Jesus
claimed, "the way, the truth, and the life" (John 14:6).
• 	This way is the way of wisdom, which leads to the good and
fulfilled life;
• This truth is the truth of righteousness, which gives moral
worth and value to life;
• This life relates the individual to the community of faith
and hope, a community extending beyond, yet including,
this present existence with its suffering and sorrow.
These three "ways," constituting the heart of the Christian
life and grounded in Jesus himself, give us a threefold paradigm
to explore further the culture 	of the kingdom of God with
respect to counseling goals.
The Way of Wisdom: A Discerning Praxis
If people who seek help from counselors could express in one
word what they would like, beyond relief from pain or depres-
sion, it probably would be wisdom. They would be quick to
point 	out that 	wisdom 	does 	not mean 	knowledge, 	though
knowledge helps. You may need knowledge to know how to
take the first step, but you need wisdom to know how to take the
second step before you take the first!
In the Old Testament, wisdom meant discovering and living
the kind of life that brought health, happiness, and fulfillment.
The book of Proverbs extols wisdom as fruitfulness, meaningful
work, moral sensibility, and security for body and soul.
The kingdom of God provides a context for discerning and
practicing wisdom. The wisdom of the kingdom is not abstract
and theoretical; it is practical and within reach of each person
through the right actions. "Wisdom," says Samuel Southard,
is reflection upon human possibilities and limitations in the light
of God's revelation. It is guided both by realistic observations of
ourselves and explanations of our attitudes and behaviors that are
drawn from revealed knowledge of God's original intentions for
his creation. The context for the wisdom of God is the power of his
love shown in understanding of the self and others-both 	friends
and strangers.a

-- 87 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	87
Here again, those who seek counseling will often lament their
inability to act and behave in ways that result in happiness and
well-being. 	They 	know better 	than 	most philosophers 	that
wisdom is discovered in the living of life, not in reflecting on it.
This discovery of the way of living is called praxis. Wisdom is a
discerning praxis, and as such it is one important aspect of the
culture of the kingdom of God.
The concept of praxis originates with Aristotle, who distin-
guished between two kinds of action. The first he called poiesis,
the act of making something that results in a product. The telos,
or final value or character of this activity, is not included in the
product. The second kind he called praxis. This kind of action
includes the telos intentionally in the action as an outcome and
also as a criterion for the quality of the action. In praxis, one not
only is guided in one's actions by the intention of realizing the
telos, but also discovers the telos through the action itself.4
We could illustrate this distinction in the construction of a
house. We measure 	the competence 	of the 	builder 	by the
technical specifications and quality of the house as a product of
professional craftsmanship. The end use of the house in terms of
the character of the people who use it (its telos), is not a factor
contained in its making. The builder would presumably devote
the same skill and diligence 	to constructing a brothel or a
church. The one who merely builds the house is not liable for its
final use or purpose (telos). The way of wisdom is discovered
through an authentic praxis in which God's purpose is more and
more realized in the living of life.
Praxis is not merely a "practice" 	in which one makes a
product or applies a theoretical knowledge; it means discerning
the truth as a final outcome of one's action. The action itself
contains its own good end, and if the end is not "good," the
action cannot be the right one. For example, when Jesus healed
on the Sabbath, he was acting in accordance with the telos of the
Sabbath, that is, God's purpose for the Sabbath in terms of
reconciliation and restoration of life to its God-intended value.
This 	was a form of praxis. The 	religious 	authorities 	who
challenged 	Jesus "practiced" 	the keeping 	of the law like a
blueprint, ignoring the telos of the law of the sabbath. This was
a form of poiesis, as Aristotle would say. This blind keeping of
the law concealed from the self-righteous Pharisees the true
purpose of the law. Even more serious, the action failed to yield

-- 88 of 257 --

88 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
the wisdom to see Jesus as the one in whom the work of God
was actually present.
The 	Old Testament 	emphasizes 	that 	God in his 	actions
intends good for his people. Likewise, the good life in word and
deed will lead the people to the goal of shalom, a concept of
peace and prosperity as a divine gift.
Jesus reiterated this concept of wisdom embodied in praxis
when he said, "You will know them by their fruits" (Matt. 7:16)
and "Why do you call me 'Lord, Lord,' and not do what I tell
you?" (Luke 6:46). He used the analogy of the good and the bad
tree to make his point: "For no good tree bears bad fruit, nor
again does a bad tree bear good fruit; for each tree is known by
its own fruit" (Luke 6:43-44).
The 	kingdom 	of God is revealed 	through 	a praxis that
embodies the telos, or maturity of a life through its actions. The
New Testament Greek word teleios (mature, perfect) was used
by those who translated the Old Testament 	into Greek (the
Septuagint) to render the Hebrew word salem (shalom), which
means "sound, complete, whole." The stress is on the concept of
being whole, perfect, or intact. It is used of the heart that is
wholly turned 	toward God (1 Kings 8:61; 11:4) and of the
person who is wholly bound to God (Gen. 6:9; Deut. 18:13).
Teleios is often used in the New Testament to mean "mature,
adult, fully developed" (1 Cor. 2:6; 14:20; Phil. 3:15). Paul uses
the word to say that he has not yet become fully "perfect" (Phil.
3: 12). But then he adds, "Let 	those of us who are mature
[teleios] be thus minded" 	(v. 15).
There 	is 	both 	an 	anthropological 	and 	an 	eschatological
concept of maturity or perfection. 	From the anthropological
perspective, 	maturity 	is not a process of ethical 	perfection
realized by degrees. Rather, maturity signifies the undivided
wholeness of a person in his or her behavior (cf. Matt. 19:21;
James 1:4). When applied to individuals, teleios, or maturity,
does not denote the qualitative end point of human endeavor,
but anticipates eschatological wholeness in actual living.
For example, a baby is "perfect" if it is healthy and growing,
even though it has not yet reached its "perfect" or "complete"
maturity. Through the praxis of living, the child not only will
grow, but through growth will actually discern and discover a
way ofliving. No person's wisdom can be given to another; each
must discover it through the praxis of living life itself.

-- 89 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	89
Jesus encouraged his disciples to "be perfect" even as the
heavenly 	Father is perfect (Matt. 5:48). In his high priestly
prayer Jesus asked that his followers be "perfected in unity" so
that the world might recognize the presence of Christ in their
lives (John 17:21). The concept of maturity, therefore, not only
must 	relate 	to an eschatological 	goal, but 	also must be 	a
Christological reality given in the present time through the gift
of the Holy Spirit 	The gift of the Holy Spirit is then itself
confirmed through a praxis of living whereby the fruit of the
Spirit-love, 	joy, peace, gentleness, goodness, etc.-are 	experi-
enced as part of what we have called growth goals.5
The "wisdom" discerned through praxis is not a maturity that
comes with age or experience alone, but is what I have earlier
called a growth process. It is a gift of discernment by which
one's life is secured and upheld from an ultimate source-God's
love and grace. This is a praxis of faith, by which one's attitudes,
emotions, and actions become ordered and integrated through
appropriation of this reality. This is to "know the truth" (John
8:32). It is to "walk in newness of life" (Rom. 6:4); to "walk by
the Spirit" (Gal. 5:16); to "walk in love" (Eph. 5:2); and to "walk
in the day" rather than in darkness (John 11:9).
The metaphor of walking carries exactly the meaning of praxis
as the discernment of wisdom. To "take up one's bed and walk"
(John 4:8) is not merely for the exercise, but to be integrated
back into life, to gain the "maturity" that belongs to those who
are fully functioning 	at the personal 	and social level. The
physical healing that enabled the paralyzed man to walk also
reintroduced him to his society and culture; he could no longer
"carry about" with him the old culture of being a cripple. In
carrying his own bed he now has a praxis of life where he will
discern the wisdom of life as his personal goal and purpose as
measured in terms of his social and communal life. The apostle
Paul suffered an apparently incurable physical problem that he
called his "thorn in the flesh." By his own testimony he says that
after praying three times for it to be removed, he came to the
understanding that this was to be a means of grace: "My grace is
sufficient for you." Therefore, concluded Paul, "my strength is
made perfect in weakness" (2 Cor. 12:9). This is the way of
wisdom by which one can gain the inner strength and coherence
of life to cope with what cannot be removed or changed.
Now, then, how does the kingdom of God act as a context for

-- 90 of 257 --

90 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
therapy? Surely we must see that therapy offers more than
psychological 	restoration. 	The 	goals of therapy 	go beyond
removing physical or emotional dysfunction. Integrating 	self
with self, with others, and with God is a praxis that discerns
meaning and purpose. The way of wisdom is the telos that
reaches back into the actions (praxis) of therapy to enable the
client to establish a coherent meaning to life. This itself can be
transforming, even when 	not every situation in life can be
transformed. There are losses that can only be grieved, includ-
ing a failed marriage, the loss of a child to raise because of
abortion, or damage done to others through one's carelessness.
The moral law supports the moral judgments in such cases.
But the moral law does not itself contain the moral freedom or
wisdom to provide healing and restoration. The kingdom of God
brings moral wisdom, not merely a relentless application of the
moral law. The church will often be tempted to think its primary
responsibility is to uphold the moral law of God and thus leave
those without moral virtue or standing exposed as victims or
failures. But if the church as the sign of the kingdom of God in
the world is to embody the moral wisdom of the kingdom, it will
need to offer restoration and renewal to those who have no
moral standing.
To say that "God hates divorce" (cf. Mal. 2:16) does not give
the Christian community the right to deny the grace of God to
those who have experienced this tragedy and failure of marriage
vows. The moral wisdom of God receives greater emphasis in
the Old Testament than his moral outrage! The story of Hosea
contains a powerful message of mercy and grace extended to a
people 	who have "committed 	adultery" 	with 	God as their
marriage partner, yet are the objects of God's love and renewal
in grace. The 	restoration 	of a person 	who has shattered 	a
marriage, aborted a fetus, or damaged another person's life has
high priority with God, for it is the restoration of his image in
humanity. The tension between upholding the divine order in
its perfection and upholding the divine intention in restoring
humanity is a praxis of moral wisdom. Christians who counsel
are agents of redemption 	when they function in this way.
Therapists who wish to bring a Christian perspective to bear
in the therapeutic 	process need 	to have this "maturity" 	or
wisdom that comes through praxis before they set themselves up
in "practice." So, too, the criteria to assess and measure effective

-- 91 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	91
therapy will consider the client's growth goals in terms of the
wisdom that belongs to those who experience the kingdom of
God.
The Gospels tell of a demon-possessed man who lived naked
among the tombs and bore the broken chains with which his
former neighbors had tried to control him. When Jesus healed
the man, he was found "sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and
in his right mind" (Luke 8:35). We marvel at the healing of this
man's emotional and mental condition. But who provided the
clothes? This man's clothing symbolized his reentry into the
community, his acceptance with trust and loving care, and his
newly discovered praxis of community. In the end, this "heal-
ing," marked by his clothing and acceptance into the commu-
nity, is as great a marvel as the healing of his tortured mind. In a
sense, this case is a parable of the culture of the kingdom of God
as a therapeutic context. Jesus could not have done it alone. And
the man was not "made perfect" until he was clothed and
restored to community.
This is the wisdom and the healing praxis by which one's life
is "made whole," which is a mark of the culture of the kingdom
of God. This is the way that Jesus offers as the discernment of
wisdom for life. We now look at the troth as a person's moral
horizon in the kingdom of God.
The Way of Righteousness: A Coherent Moral Vision
The biblical concept of truth is lodged in the larger concept of
righteousness. The righteousness of God is his acting "rightly"
so as to bring forth the truth as a result. We cannot be "in the
truth" unless we are rightly related to God and to our neighbor.
The opposite of truth is unrighteousness, which is a life devoted
to deception and deviousness. This is a basic theme in Paul's
letter to the Romans (especially chapters 3-6).
A life congruent with the truth of God's purpose as lived out
in praxis has a moral vision that is shared with the community
and culture with which one is identified. 	In the Christian
community and 	culture, 	moral vision and moral discourse
permeate 	all structures and relationships. 	Stanley Hauerwas
makes this point when he says:

-- 92 of 257 --

92 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
The church as a community of moral discourse gives meaning to its
ethical terms. To use such terms as freedom and equality as values
that are Christian and hence appropriate in a theory of government
or therapy neglects the fact that these terms have material content
in Jesus' definition of the Kingdom and as they are incarnated in
His life and death. Ethical terms are not self interpreting but
require a tradition to give them content.6
In the environment of the kingdom of God, personal goals are
thus subject to kingdom goals while, at the same time, kingdom
righteousness is exemplified in the integrity of social relation-
ships. While the kingdom is concerned with the inner righteous-
ness life of the individual person, it is even more concerned
with justice for the oppressed, fairness in trade and commerce,
regard for the poor and the "stranger within the gate," and
genuineness in approach to God through the worship and rituals
of community life.
The kingdom of God imposes a "coherent moral vision" on
the existing cultural and social structures, stressing righteous-
ness 	as an 	ethical 	link 	between 	persons 	and 	a religious
connection between the people and God. In the culture of the
kingdom of God, the moral and spiritual apostasy of one person
affects the righteousness of the community. This is seen in the
dramatic incident when Achan stole and hid some of the things
taken from the enemies in the victory over Jericho. His single
action caused the defeat of Joshua in the next military campaign,
and the writer says that in this situation, "the people of Israel
broke faith ..... 	Gosh. 7:1-26). 	In many other incidents, the
actions of a few resulted in the loss of righteousness for the
entire people.
The concept of a coherent moral vision, then, is not an abstract
set of moral principles. It is a moral vision of the social structure
of community in which individual 	lives are bound up in a
coherent and interconnected 	whole.
The righteousness 	of a single person is derived from the
righteousness of a people as a whole. However, this righteous-
ness is not the result of the perfecting of individual moral lives.
The righteousness of the people solely depends upon the grace
of God, who constitutes them as a people. The covenant, as the
binding metaphor of this relation between the Lord and the
people, is the basis for the moral vision of a people who "belong

-- 93 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	93
to Yahweh" and who are therefore a holy people because he
who called and constituted 	them as a people is holy.
This can be 	seen from another 	perspective 	as well. The
individual partakes of the righteousness of the community as a
privilege and gift. Circumcision sanctified a person symbolically
both by "cutting 	away the 	flesh" 	of natural 	origin and by
creating a new identity as a covenant person. The community,
not the 	individual 	act of penance, 	provided 	the 	source for
renewal of faith and the renewal of moral and spiritual integrity.
The community functioned 	both as administrator 	of justice
and mediator of mercy between 	God and the individual. 	No
private contrition or familial bond could sufficiently dissolve the
ethical 	relation 	of the 	individual 	to the 	community. 	Achan
repented 	of his wrongdoing, but the community nonetheless
stoned him to death for his sin. Parents might excuse their
children's rebellious acts, but they must nonetheless hand their
children 	over to the elders 	of the community for discipline
(Deut. 21:18-21).
Yet the community was also commanded to provide cities of
refuge for the "manslayer" to find protection against the avenger
(Num. 35). Righteousness is not only retribution for wrongdoing
to satisfy a sense of moral justice; it is an act of restoring lost
personhood. The community, as the source of a person's moral
dignity, provides that moral worth through concrete actions of
social inclusiveness.
In dealing with "outsiders" 	and those without any claim to
righteousness, 	Jesus himself provided a "circle of refuge" for
the sinner. To self-righteous critics who accused him of indis-
cretion, he said, "The tax collectors and the harlots go into the
kingdom of God before you" (Matt. 21:31; cf. also Luke 7:29-
30).
The 	one 	who mediates 	between 	the 	individual 	and 	the
community performs a "priestly" service, both as an advocate of
the individual who approaches the community for healing and
restoration, and as representative 	of the community as an "agent
of righteousness." 	This priestly service is closely linked to the
growth process, in which a motive power to experience change
and 	growth 	is released. 	As an intermediary, 	the 	one 	who
performs the priestly service shares a common humanity and
mediates the righteousness 	of grace and healing.

-- 94 of 257 --

94 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
For every high priest chosen from among men is appointed to act
on behalf of men in relation to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for
sin. He can deal gently with the ignorant and wayward, since he
himself is beset with weakness. Because of this he is bound to offer
sacrifice for his own sins as well as for those of the people. And one
does not take the honor upon himself, but he is called by God, just
as Aaron was (Heb. 5:1-4).
This person embodies the "moral horizon" that constitutes the
community of the kingdom of God. But the person does not
function primarily as an ethical agent, bound to ethical codes of
professional practice alone. This person is an agent of righteous-
ness. As a therapeutic gain, one may remove psychological guilt,
but to establish the person "in righteousness" places the person
in truth. That is, the gift of forgiveness and peace is affirmed by
one's belonging to and participating in the kingdom of God.
Such forgiveness goes beyond even contrition and confession,
which themselves are not sufficient to establish righteousness.
The 	righteousness 	of the 	kingdom 	of God is a social and
communal 	reality 	mediated 	through 	and 	by 	the 	one 	who
performs this priestly service.
Christians who counsel can also represent this culture of the
kingdom of God. They need to think of righteousness in terms of
a life that is given a "moral horizon" as a growth goal in addition
to the growth goals belonging to the process of therapy. The
wisdom that people seek when they come for counseling will
often be hidden to them, and perhaps to the counselor as well. A
skill even 	more 	important 	for the 	counselor 	than 	clinical
intuition is the discerning praxis of this wisdom that will orient
the client to a trajectory of health and growth extending beyond
specific therapeutic 	gains.
Didn't Jesus suggest that, with his authority and presence,
every Christian could act as an "agent of righteousness" 	(cf.
John 20:21-23; Acts 1:8)? The early church seemed to think so.
"But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation,
God's own people, that you may declare the wonderful deeds of
him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
Once you were no people but now you are God's people; once
you had not received mercy hut now you have received mercy"
(1 Peter 2:9-10). 	We will have more to say about this in the
final chapter of this book as we develop more fully the role of
the counselor as a form of pastoral care.

-- 95 of 257 --

THE ICINGOOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	95
Christian 	counselors should represent 	the coherent 	moral
vision embodied 	in a community that 	offers righteousness
beyond therapeutic gain. Such counselors provide the growth
goal 	of 	righteousness 	through 	authentic 	forgiveness 	and
affirmation by a community representing the kingdom of God.
Does this mean that a Christian therapist must in every case
provide therapy through the institutional form of the Christian
community-say 	a local church setting? Not necessarily. In the
parable of the good Samaritan, the Samaritan became the agent
of righteousness, not the priest or the Levite, both of whom
represented 	the institutionalized 	religious community.
It does mean, however, that the concept of "private practice"
will be radically qualified for the Christian therapist, because
the mediation of righteousness requires a living community as a
context in which the therapist lives and to which the therapist is
accountable. It also means that, to lead the client past therapeu-
tic gain, the counselor must establish on the trajectory of growth
the goal of righteousness as embodied affirmation of belonging.
There can be no definitive model for the way a Christian
therapist serves in a professional capacity. Many work on the
staff of mental health or psychological clinics where the services
are offered to the public without a context of community or
church support. In these cases, individual therapists will have to
think out for themselves what it means to provide this service as
a Christian, 	taking into account growth goals beyond mere
therapeutic 	gain. The role of the Christian as a professional
counselor will be discussed at greater length in chapter 10.
Kirk Farnsworth, who offers a concept of "embodied integra-
tion" based on an incarnational model, suggests that one of the
best strategies for bringing our counseling practice under the
lordship of Christ is to establish a group of believers to whom
we are professionally accountable. This would provide a Chris-
tian forum for discussion, prayer, and shared concerns and also
place the counselor in a context and culture that extends the
Christian community.7 But what about the growth goals of the
client? The counselor may try to provide this linkage for the
client if it does not already exist. Who will "clothe" the client
when 	therapy 	comes to an end? 	Just 	as important 	is the
question, what community will provide the "moral horizon" of
health (righteousness) for the client during therapy?
These questions have no easy answers. The Christian who

-- 96 of 257 --

96 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
counsels, 	however, 	cannot define therapy 	so narrowly as to
ignore the culture 	of the kingdom 	of God as a context for
therapy. The concept of "private practice" will also need to be
reexamined when viewed from this perspective. If we use the
adjective "Christian," 	we must recognize it as a verb of action
that includes a praxis of community life.
The implications of what we are saying here also apply to the
church. 	A Christian 	community 	that 	is not 	providing 	this
"priestly" 	service of therapy "on the streets," 	so to speak, is
failing to be neighbor to those who are in need. In the culture of
the 	kingdom 	of God, 	the 	community 	cannot 	itself 	sustain
righteousness 	without being also the "good Samaritan."
We are tracing out the implications of the kingdom of God as a
culture 	that provides 	a context for therapy 	from a Christian
perspective. 	Using the formula statement of Jesus-"I 	am the
way, the truth, and the life" -we 	are developing a context for
therapy that includes wisdom, righteousness, and now commu-
nity. This community of the kingdom fulfills the individual's
quest for identity, meaning, and hope.
The Way of the Community: 	An Embodied 	Identity
The emergence 	of "identity" 	psychologies in the early and
middle 	part of this century 	was as much a response 	to the
growing emphasis 	on the 	individual 	self and the 	thirst 	for
experience as it was a weariness with the earlier naturalistic and
biological attempts 	to explain human behavior. 	Behavior no
longer preoccupied the therapists, but rather the phenomenon
of the 	person 	as an experiencing 	self.8 The 	humanist 	and
existential psychologists found a ready market for a variety of
new 	therapies 	in contemporary 	Western 	society where 	the
older, more traditional ties of community identity were broken
or rejected outright. The quest for "reality" 	even provoked a
"reality therapy" 	(William Glasser).
Alvin Dueck suggests that naming reality is the central task of
any healer. When the search for reality at the experiential level
moves the self inward rather than outward, the person loses
reality. In our ecological model of personhood (chap. 2) it was
argued 	that 	people 	operate 	in 	a three-sphere 	matrix: 	the
physical, the social, and the spiritual. The self (psyche/soul) is
totally present in each of the three spheres, but the "reality" of

-- 97 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	97
the self is experienced 	as a praxis of intentionality, belonging,
and identity that includes all three. This is what "embodied
identity" 	means. The embodiment 	is not only in one's own
physical 	body, 	but 	in the 	"body" 	of the 	community 	as a
corporate identity from which self identity is derived and on
which it is always somewhat dependent.
For example, the identity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob-the
founders of the new "family" and community of the kingdom of
God-was 	given embodiment through the covenant promise of
God. The ritual of circumcision was one form of creating a new
identity. The new identity, of course, was actually the naming of
reality by which the individual was integrated into the tradition
of the community as being in continuity with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. It is interesting 	to see that this ritual affected the
identity of the self (psyche/soul) 	at three levels. Identity was
literally "cut into the flesh" through circumcision, which was
both a ritual of incorporation into the family and community and
a sign and seal of the spiritual reality of covenant promise by
which one became a member of the kingdom of God. Circumci-
sion, like the Christian ritual of baptism, is not performed on
oneself; it is performed by significant others who represent the
community or "body" that gives the person primary identity.
The community that represents the culture of the kingdom of
God names this reality through the story, in which the tradition
is carried forward through its living members. Personal identity
is thus derived from the community identity of a people who
have as their essential being a history of community with God.
This identity is firmly grounded in this particular history of a
people of God. This is one reason why the concept of history is
so important for the Hebrew people.
Losing this community identity and participation in a living
history will result in a sense of anomie or disassociation for the
individual. The person may move from finding his or her reality
in community to finding it in the reality of the inner life. Brooks
Holifield 	suggests 	that 	this 	tendency 	can be 	found 	in the
development of a distinct emphasis in pastoral counseling over
the past several centuries 	in North America.
The story proceeds from an ideal of self-denial to one of self-love
to self-culture, from self-culture to self-mastery, from self-mastery
to self-realization within a trustworthy culture, and finally to a later

-- 98 of 257 --

98 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
form of self-realization counterpoised against cultural mores and
social institutions.a
Holifield also suggests that the contemporary 	preoccupation
with psychology might be traced to the influence of experiential
piety in religion.
The German theologian Wolfhart Pannenberg 	has analyzed
the effect of "penitential 	piety" as related to the loss of a sense
of community identity in Western society. He points out that the
Protestant tradition has emphasized attaining an individualistic
spirituality based on a sense of deep personal guilt over sin and
suggests that a better model for spirituality would be celebration
of one's life in community. This he calls "eucharistic piety."10
There is indeed 	some suspicion that modem culture• s ten-
dency toward self-realization owes something to a religious
inwardness that has become separated from the righteousness of
the kingdom of God. The culture of the kingdom demands a
righteous 	concern for the "fatherless," 	that is, those 	whose
identity 	as members 	of the 	community 	is threatened. 	This
righteousness integrates marginal persons into the "mature" life
of the community; it does not segregate them through discrimi-
natory practices or institutional 	dormitories.
"Our believing is conditioned at its source by our belonging,"
writes Michael Polanyi.11Therapeutic gains that do not establish
or reinforce a trajectory of growth in terms of participating in
community life as a culture of the kingdom of God fall short of
the growth goals that have been 	defined as essential to the
maturity of the self. It is not enough to give a name or to create
an identity for an individual. The naming of reality by which
personal 	identity 	is formed and 	sustained 	is a function 	of
community, not the client or the therapist. The character of this
community will determine the significance of the identity and
reality by which the members are named.
For the early church, the ritual of Christian baptism was
sometimes enacted as a "household" 	or "family" ritual (c£ Acts
16:33). But even if performed with an individual, it was always
with the intent of baptizing the person into the community, and
it was always an act on behalf of the community. For many
people, the culture of the kingdom of God represented 	a break
with the previous family and kinship ties. This necessitated a

-- 99 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	99
praxis by which a new sense of family and kinship became a
concrete reality.
The 	church 	has never 	fully developed 	its function 	as a
"therapeutic 	bridge" for individuals who are without a strong
sense of identity and belonging in modem society. In fact, many
of the church's evangelistic methods may actually contribute to
the breakdown of the social identity of persons. The remarkable
proliferation of clients from within the Christian church who are
seeking therapeutic 	relief from personal and emotional stress
may be one indication of this.
While this phenomenon provides a "ready market" for Chris-
tian therapists, one has to question the root cause for such a
failure of psychological health among church members. It is the
concern of this book to present the case for a Christian approach
to therapy that will address the actual structures of Christian
community itself, both as a contributing cause to the lack of
emotional health 	among its members 	and as a resource 	for
providing a context where growth goals can be realized beyond
mere therapeutic 	gain.
For all its concentration 	on the concrete present 	and the
history in which one's present is grounded, the kingdom of God
is a culture that embodies a strong sense of the future. This
future does not merely extend the present into some ideal state
of existence beyond today, although that expectation exists. But
the concept of the future in the culture of the kingdom is that of
a reality that is coming into the present.
The kingdom of God presents the future as advent, as a reality
that is coming into the present out of the future. It is given as
promise and carries signs in the present of its coming to us. For
Christians, this advent has occurred in the coming of Jesus
Christ as the incarnation of God himself and, therefore, as the
embodiment 	of the future that belongs to all who are in the
kingdom. The physical and psychical healings performed by
Jesus can be understood as dramatic signs of ultimate wholeness
and healing.
Promise, then, does not mean escaping the present, but using
the future as a basis for belief and as a growth goal by which the
self can experience integration and wholeness. Promise enables
and empowers us to grasp with hope the present 	and all its
imperfections and uncertainties. The maturity of faith integrates
hope into a realistic and creative approach to life.

-- 100 of 257 --

100 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
How can people 	experience 	now this hope that provides
wholeness and faith? Through forgiveness of sin, for one thing.
Absolution is not merely a formal pronouncement, 	because it
liberates us from the consequences 	of our actions and from
psychological and spiritual anguish. It assures us that our hope
for forgiveness and freedom from sin will not in the end be
betrayed.
Beyond the therapeutic gain that comes from dealing with the
inner psychological dynamics of guilt through confession, there
is the growth goal of absolution as an act of the community.
Here, too, the therapist must mediate between the client and the
community, which uses the therapist to embody its culture as a
people of God.
Hope can also be experienced now in the promise that life
itself is a value and good that cannot be lost through one's own
feeling of insignificance or the threat of suffering and even
death. The kingdom of God does not make suffering a good, but
it affirms the one who overcomes suffering through patience and
steadfast hope.
Does my small life count? Does what I do, despite my failures
and even deliberate 	digressions from the good, really mean
something in the end? I should hope it does! The gift of God's
Spirit, the community upholding my baptism, and the reality of
belonging that grips me even when I suffer confusion, disorder,
or sickness-all 	these compel me to hope and empower me to
live.
Summary
These, then, are the themes 	of the kingdom of God as a
therapeutic 	context for Christians who counsel:
• A discerning wisdom that gives meaning and coherence to
those seeking help; this is the way that Jesus came to be
and share;
• A righteousness embodied in the moral structures of God's
people; this is the truth that Jesus came to be and create;
• 	A sense of identity communicated through a story in which
each person has a part; and a hope that compels faith to
value life and to love community; this is the life that Jesus
came to be and to give.

-- 101 of 257 --

THE KINGDOM OF COD AS THERAPEUTIC CONTEXT 	101
In subsequent 	chapters we will explore some of the spiritual
dynamics that provide resources and a context for therapy from a
Christian perspective.
Notes
1. S. L. Halleck, The Politics of Therapy (New York: Harper & Row,
1971), 36.
2. Alvin C. Dueck, ••Ethical Contexts of Healing: Peoplehood and
Righteousness," 	Pastoral Psychology 35, no. 4 (Summer 1987): 249. I
am greatly indebted to Dr. Dueck for his contribution to my thinking
about the kingdom of God as a context and resource for therapy as well
as for the overall emphasis and some of the specific themes of this
chapter.
3. Samuel Southard, Theology and Therapy: The Wisdom of God in
a Context of Friendship (Dallas: Word Books, 1989), ix. Southard also
says, ..And this is why some theologies are defective in wisdom. They
do not prepare counselors for realistic testing of mind and heart. They
do not deal with the question, how do we receive and respond to God's
revelation? This misses a consistent theme of wisdom, that human
claims of righteousness 	may conceal as well as reveal the self' 	(2).
C. 	Stephen 	Evans 	makes 	a distinction 	between 	wisdom 	and
shrewdness. A shrewd person knows how to manipulate situations so as
to gain the most and lose the least. True wisdom, says Evans, means
understanding ..one's own life, an understanding which may be painful.
But the fact that wisdom cannot be guaranteed by a technique does not
imply that nothing can be done to encourage the development 	of
wisdom" 	(Wisdom and Humanness in Psychology: Prospects for a
Christian Approach [Grand Rapids: Baker, 1989], 71).
4. Aristotle, The Nichomachean Ethics, IX, vi. 5. For a more
extended 	discussion 	of the 	concept 	of praxis as applied 	to the
development 	of competence 	for ministry, see my article, ..Christo-
praxis: Competence as a Criterion for Theological Education," 	Theo-
logical Student's Fellowship Bulletin Oanuary-February 	1984): 10-
13.
5. For additional information on the concept of maturity or perfec-
tion, see Telos in The New International Dictionary of New Testament
Theology, vol. 2, ed. Colin Brown (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1976),
59-66.
6. Stanley 	Hauerwas, 	A Community 	of Character: Toward a
Constructive Christian Social Ethic (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of
Notre Dame Press, 1981), 134.
7. Kirk E. Farnsworth, 	Wholehearted Integration: Harmonizing
Psychology and Christianity Through Word and Deed (Grand Rapids:
Baker, 1985), 90.

-- 102 of 257 --

102 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
8. In Germany in the late nineteenth 	century, Wilhelm Dilthey
(1833-19ll) 	was outspoken in urging the need for a psychology that
sought to appreciate individuals as living entities capable of personal
integration. In the early part of this century, other German psychothera-
pists continued an emphasis on the whole person, including Wilhelm
Stem, Kurt Goldstein, and Edward Spranger. Other psychiatrists and
psychologists developed humanistic psychologies following this ten-
dency, including Alfred Adler, Karen Homey, Erich Fromm, Kurt
Lewin, Gordon Allport, and Carl Rogers. For an excellent survey of
some of these psychologies see Roger Hurtling, The Tree of Healing
(Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1988), chaps. 6- 7.
9. E. Brooks Holifield, A History of Pastoral Care in America: From
Salvation to Self-Realization (Nashville: Abingdon, 1983), 12.
10. Wolfhart Pannenberg, 	Christian Spirituality and Sacramental
Community (London: Dartman, Longman and Todd, 1983).
ll. Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1958), 322.

-- 103 of 257 --

5
The 	Grace of God as
Therapeutic 	Intervention
..My grace is sufficient for you." The thorn in the Hesh would
remain, but the apostle Paul would learn to live with it and even
confess that he was content (2 Cor. 12:9). Learning to live with a
physical disability and learning contentment 	are two quite
different things. For Paul, the grace of God was not merely a
sedative for discomfort; it transformed his soul.
For my friend Susie, the same is true. Afflicted with cerebral
palsy since birth, she speaks with extreme difficulty and walks
with lurching, spastic movements. When she completed her
master's degree in theology, I suggested that she might minister
to handicapped persons .
..I 	don't 	have 	that 	much 	in 	common with 	handicapped
people," she responded ... Most of them haven't forgiven God for
who they are, and I have."
Susie is writing a book that will share her perspective on life
and Christianity. The opening chapter is titled ..Being Normal
in an Abnormal World." Having a "thorn in the Hesh" doesn't
make us abnormal or less than a total person. Somewhere,
somehow, Susie and the apostle Paul realized that wholeness is
not the same as perfection.
The purpose of this chapter is to show more clearly how this
grace of God that effects an inner wholeness can be related to
therapeutic intervention. We will discuss first how dysfunction
relates to the concept of "whole person." Then we will look at
God's 	grace as a 	dynamic 	of the 	growth process 	and 	of
103

-- 104 of 257 --

104 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
reconciliation. Finally we will examine the intervention of grace
and conversion in the therapeutic process.
Being a Total Person When All the Parts Are Not Working
Therapeutic gains are relative and pragmatic. Growth goals
are essential and realistic. This is as clear a distinction as can be
made between healing and wholeness, or between function and
self-perception. The concepts of "growth process" and "growth
goals" are similar to what in chapter 3 we called the "agogic
situation," 	following the 	lead 	of Jacob Firet. 	This 	growth
process includes the release of a motive power for change,
involves the humanity of the counselor as intermediary, and
produces change and growth in the client. Thus growth goals are
related to the integrative and relational aspects of the self as
open to change and as defined by the nature of personhood as
presented in chapter 2.
Specific therapeutic objectives are relative to this essential
trajectory of growth and have their value in promoting integra-
tion and growth. It is in this sense that therapeutic gains are also
pragmatic. They are means to an end rather than being an end in
themselves.
The reality of the self is essential to the well-being of the self
as a relational being. When this reality is experienced as the
core of one's identity, it is "whole," though not always perfect in
function. Many levels of dysfunction limit a person's freedom to
move within his or her own environment. These limitations can
be physical, psychical, or spiritual, or some combination of each.
The essential reality of the self as the core of identity can be
expressed and experienced 	by others in its totality despite
certain levels of dysfunction.
This is obviously the case with regard to physical disabilities.
Physical impairment, even dismemberment, does not destroy
the "totality" of the self in its core identity. There are limitations
of function, to be sure, and these limitations constitute in many
cases severe losses at the experiential level for which the self
must compensate. This is also true for those with emotional and
mental disability or impairment. 	No parent 	with a Down's
syndrome child will tolerate the suggestion that the child is any
less a total person, despite the retardation of mental processes.
My friend Susie perceives herself as normal because she

-- 105 of 257 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	105
experiences a positive and tangible form of self-love through the
people who help her with the simplest functions of dressing and
eating. Most of us, being physically and mentally able to live
without the direct touch or presence of another person, live with
a high degree of autonomy. We are free to choose whether or not
we want to be touched or helped, or even whether we want to
be with other people. We think this is normal. Susie thinks it is
abnormal for people to live in an isolated and private world,
moving out to touch others only when there is need or desire.
She experiences grace as a whole and normal person despite
physical and mental frustrations and failures.
Psycho-spiritual forms of distress, including sinful attitudes
and dispositions, do not destroy the totality of personal identity.
God continues to address as fully personal those human beings
who are spiritually 	estranged 	and hostile. 	If we were 	not
essentially total persons, even as sinners and spiritually decrepit
people, 	we could not continue to create meaningful human
relationships and enter into social-personal community.
But there is a limit. The dysfunctions at every level can
become so severe that the totality of the person is virtually
concealed from view. The core of the self identity can become
so out of focus and tormented that this "wholeness" cannot be
sustained, except through the intentions of others who insist that
the self remain as it "really" is. Those who live with people in
an acute stage of Alzheimer's disease, for example, sustain the
totality of that afHicted person in a kind of vicarious way.
The point is this: therapeutic gains, whether through physical
therapy, 	psychotherapy, 	or pneuma-therapy 	(spiritual 	disci-
plines), are only relative gains. The gains in these areas can
never be total or permanent. There is a value to the gains, to a
point At the point where the cost of further gain is so great and
the gain so little, continued therapy may not be a pragmatic
value to the totality and reality of the self. This point, of course,
must be negotiated by each person to the extent that there
remains a core of identity on which to make the assessment.
The Growth Process as a Dynamic of God's Grace
The essential reality of the self and the core of identity gives
content to the growth goals, which are not related directly to the
therapeutic gains in any kind of deterministic or causal way. For

-- 106 of 257 --

106 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
example, a self-perception as a whole person, essentially good
and with a positive and hopeful attitude toward life, cannot be
produced 	though reducing 	anxiety alone. Psychotherapy 	can
reduce psychic trauma and enable persons to regain a fairly high
degree of function in daily living and work. But therapeutic
technique will not cause a person to perceive herself or himself
as whole and filled with self-love.
This is exactly the reason why Viktor Frankl concluded that
many people 	do not 	permit 	themselves 	to "escape" 	from
therapy. The "decision" that one is whole and that life is good
and has meaning is so difficult and threatening that the client
prolongs 	the 	treatment. 	When 	Frankl 	stopped 	treating 	the
psyche alone and instead challenged the person to meaning, he
discovered 	that in many cases people 	could live with their
anxieties and even neuroses if there were meaning and purpose
in their lives. And ·so logotherapy was born.
The merits or limitations of logotherapy are not the issue here.
Frankl' s experience, however, points to the well-known phe-
nomenon of people "suddenly" 	deciding they are well enough
to function without further therapy. In my judgment, this points
to what I call a contingent relation between psychic health and
personal wholeness. 	By "contingent" 	is meant a relation in
which there is some kind of correlation, but not a causal or
deterministic 	one. Being a whole person as a psychic-somatic
unity is contingent on some orientation toward or relation with a
source or power beyond the psychic-somatic entity itself.
The apostle Paul's "contentedness" 	with his life situation,
tormenting and inconveniencing 	as it was, resulted 	from his
perception 	that 	God had 	given 	him 	"grace." 	Susie 	put 	it
somewhat differently 	when 	she said that she had "forgiven
God" for who she is. But she had come to this inner place of
wholeness and self-acceptance because she had experienced the
love of others even as a small child. Realizing her physical
limitations and the acute loss that this meant to her in many
ways, she experienced 	God as free from the responsibility 	to
heal or change her. Thereby she could experience God and his
grace through the care and love of other persons. Their love
represents the love and grace of God on which her life depends.
They serve as intermediaries 	in the growth process.
I repeat, therapeutic 	gains are relative and pragmatic while
growth goals are essential and realistic. The long-range integra-

-- 107 of 257 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	107
tion and growth of the self may at times need specific therapeu-
tic intervention. Because the grace of God is experienced as a
dynamic process of change and growth, grace can also aid the
therapeutic process in its relative and pragmatic task of assisting
this growth. God's 	grace can be experienced 	as a fonn of
intervention 	through 	the 	growth 	process. 	This 	provides 	a
context for therapeutic procedures to function so as to contribute
to the growth goals.
The growth goals presuppose the totality of the self as a whole
person, even though the self is not perfect in all its functions.
This point is so vital to what follows that it must not be missed.
Being a whole person, or a total person in this dynamic sense, is
the very construct of personhood. In addressing the other person
as a self, one presupposes that the other is "really" a person and
that the potential of response inheres in the self. The growth
process can only exist where there is "equi-human" address, as
Jacob Firet has put it. The totality of human selfhood must be
equal and fully present on both sides of this process to provide a
context for therapeutic gain and to provide the motivation and
right moment for "escaping" from therapy, to use Frankl's term.
The 	biblical 	concept 	that 	the 	image 	of God constitutes
personhood thus establishes each person's core identity as an
essential, not merely functional, aspect of the self. To create and
enter into the growth process with other persons is, from a
Christian perspective, 	to recognize 	and affirm the essential
grace of God by which persons 	exist. This grace is not a
movement by God toward persons prompted by sin or by need
alone. It is by and through the grace of God that the self exists at
all in the freedom and mystery of personhood. Sin works against
this grace, denying the freedom and responsibility to love.
Grace is the freedom of God expressed creatively as the
..encounter" that preserves humanity in personal relation with
God and with other persons. 	Theologians 	have called this
..common grace," though it should not be confused with some
impersonal attribute that belongs to nature. Common grace is
the positive, personal, and continual intervention of God that
prevents the cosmos and its creatures from slipping into chaos
and "falling out of' the reality of being created and related.
This is one way of understanding the biblical meaning of sin
and the "sinner." 	Because God continues to intervene when
persons act self-destructively and negatively, he preserves a

-- 108 of 257 --

108 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
"real history" of the person instead of mere fate. Actions that
deny and destroy love as the bond of relationship with God and
the neighbor rebound to God himself. This is at once terrifying
and hopeful. It is terrifying, because now the self must confront
the essential and real instead of pragmatically accommodating
its fate. Yet it is hopeful, because now the grace of God, which is
the original basis for one's essential and real existence, inter-
venes in this self-deception and self-destruction.
In his perceptive 	book Life and Faith, W. W. Meissner
suggests that a theology of divine grace must be accompanied by
a psychology of grace. "Grace not only alters our theological
condition, changing us in reference to the supernatural," 	he
writes, "but it delves into our very nature and makes contact
with the depths of our psychic reality.'' 1 A psychology of grace
means more than transposing theological insights and terms into
psychological language. Grace is divine action motivating the
receptive psyche. Meissner adds that
the action of grace must make a difference to the living of the
Christian life. It must alter our experience and the course of our
life cycle. This does not mean that the action of grace is itself
immediately experienced, but it does mean that we are somehow
changed and presumably spiritually assisted and advanced by its
inHuence.ll
What Firet called the "motive power" released in the "agogic
moment," Meissner calls the effect of grace as a psychological
dynamic of change in behavior.
Corresponding to the work of Erik Erikson in a psychology of
personal identity development, Meissner argues that we must
have a psychology of spiritual identity development that views
the grace of God as the ego's source of energy and direction.
Spiritual identity, he suggests, Hows out of the same ego center
in the self as personal identity. Where lack of a healthy ego
impairs the development of personal identity, spiritual identity
will also suffer. This is the core ofMeissner's integrative model.
While 	therapeutic 	intervention 	using 	strictly 	psychological
means can assist the ego in developing a personal identity, it
cannot assist in developing spiritual identity, for this can only
take place 	through 	the 	intervention 	of divine 	grace. Such
therapeutic 	intervention 	only partially recovers the essential

-- 109 of 257 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	109
function of the ego, for spiritual identity is also necessary to the
complete identity of the self as created in the divine image.
Psychoanalytic therapy cannot produce spiritual identity, says
Meissner, 	but 	the 	intervention 	of grace can promote 	this
spiritual 	development 	and 	also assist in the 	ego's 	task of
personal identity development. This is true because spiritual
identity is a function of the ego and thus is directly related to
both divine grace and the psyche. Therefore, using "means of
grace" in the therapeutic process will promote both personal
and spiritual growth.
Grace is the energizing and relational principle on the spiritual
level for the proper functions of the ego. Development of spiritual
identity, then, is achieved through the same ego-functions that are
involved in the natural psychological identity. The relation be-
tween these two levels is based on the operation of the common
functions: in terms of psychological identity, these functions
operate on their own, but in terms of spiritual identity, there is an
added component supplied through grace.3
While I do not totally agree with Meissner's assumption that
grace merely "perfects nature," so that the ego's natural state is
"without grace," I do think his emphasis on the psychological
effects of grace on both personal and spiritual growth contrib-
utes greatly to our understanding of the integration of grace into
the therapeutic 	process.
The grace of God creates anew the growth process out of the
autonomy and self-preserving motivations of those who Hee
from God and conceal themselves from their neighbor. For this
reason 0. Hobart Mowrer has said that "sin is the lesser of two
evils" as compared with sickness. When sin is understood as a
personal construct rather than an impersonal "condition," the
possibilities of "radical redemption" 	are opened up.•
Because the self is real from the very beginning, the potential
for growing into a mature person is based on the totality of the
self as person. This "potential" 	is the freedom of the self to
move on the psycho-spiritual continuum in a process of change,
growth, and development. When people are confronted by the
reality of grace, they are confronted by the reality of God. One
cannot have grace without 	God. But grace presupposes 	the
freedom of the person to respond, and therefore grace creates
and gives freedom as the motive power oflove. Freedom to love

-- 110 of 257 --

110 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
does not come from autonomy and self-will, but from the growth
process in which we experience the reality of our personal being
in the relation as necessary to the relation.
The theologian Otto Weber puts it this way:
The epitome of that kind of existence in which we are free but not
autonomous, in which we are neither the functionaries nor the
autonomously cooperating partners of God, is love. It accords with
the state of man's existence which is defined by the Spirit. Thus it
is the form in which the good command of God arrives at its right
in us-just 	as the «law" reaches its goal and its end in Christ
(Rom. 10:14), love is the «law's" fulfillment (Rom. 13:10; c£ Matt.
22:40 and John 13:34).s
While love is the motive power for change and growth, it is not a
product of therapeutic gain, nor is it a result of psychic healing.
Love is the effect produced by grace, which gives freedom to
respond, 	where 	the 	response 	itself 	is expected 	and 	even
demanded by the relation. This is why Jesus commanded us to
love one another. 	This command to love is not an ethical
demand, but one that comes through the intervention of grace.
Grace intervenes into our self-isolation and penetrates our self-
deception 	to give us freedom to love in response. 	This 	is
because, as Meissner has shown, grace energizes the ego to
make new and healthy responses 	in terms of both personal
identity and spiritual identity. Love is therefore a goal that is
transformative in nature and a process of development along the
psycho-spiritual continuum.
The goal of this development is included in the process. That
is what constitutes this growth as praxis rather than merely the
"making" of a product. Praxis is the process of creating the truth
through being and doing. The growth process therefore is a form
of praxis. The praxis of growth talces place when a motive power
for change and growth is released by which the self grasps the
reality and totality of personal life as essential to the core of
identity. It is as normal as the first step of a baby, as difficult as
the first "word" learned by Helen Keller in the silent darkness
of total impairment of sight and hearing. It is as ordinary as
gaining a new friendship, as extraordinary as experiencing God.

-- 111 of 257 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	111
The I nteroention of Grace as Reconciliation
Why is the grace of God that leads to wholeness and love so
difficult to experience? It may be because the human self is so
proficient in self-deception! 	Psychotherapists 	who work with
people seeking emotional healing often find that self-deception
is a common problem in their clients.
"Wounded 	individuals 	who seek relief through psychother-
apy," says Walter Becker, "usually present distortions, smoke-
screens, misperceptions, 	and evasions in their experience and
description 	of reality."& Healing growth must, therefore, come
through correcting this self-deception, which manifests itself in
many ways, including reaction formation, repression, and ration-
alization. Becker concludes that the task of psychotherapy is to
lead people to a more realistic, authentic perception 	of them-
selves. I believe this is true, but I would argue that this problem
cannot be resolved through therapy alone.
Fundamentally, 	self-deception, 	which is one way of under-
standing the psychology of sin as a prevailing disposition, is not
merely a denial of reality but is also a denial of grace. Self-
deception is a form of spiritual autonomy. The self retreats into a
private place and perceives reality through the prism of the self
alone. The primary deception is not what the self perceives, but
the selfs 	being autonomous and private. Grace is the creative
freedom that relates the self and will not permit this autonomy
of self-perception.
One of the basic self-deceptions is the religious self. I suggest
that a significant number of neurotic and even psychotic people
manifest their distortions in some kind of religious experience
or perception. 	For this reason the therapist cannot assume that
the religious self is a reliable source of wholeness on which to
build. In my judgment, those who seek to integrate theology and
psychology by integrating religious values and perceptions into
therapy can mistake religious life for integrative life. Religious
behavior 	and religious 	values 	can be incorporated 	into the
psychological construct of the human personality, both in theory
and in practice. The question is whether or not this merging of
psychology and religion is really the integration of God's grace
into the human integrative 	task itself.
The Episcopal clergyman Carroll E. Simcox puts it this way:

-- 112 of 257 --

112 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
"Christianity begins where religion ends-with 	the Resurrec-
tion." The reference here is specifically to the resurrection of
Christ rather than to that transition to experiencing God as a
companion which is the final stage of religion. There 	is a
connection between the two, but they are not identical. The
believer 	knows that God's companionship 	is not a delusion
because he or she knows Christ as real and present, in the power of
his resurrection. 7
The religious self as well must be corrected, or "sanctified" by
grace. While the theological concept of "atonement" is consid-
ered a religious ritual and experience, 	religion itself needs
"atonement," otherwise it becomes another form of self-decep-
tion. For this reason the theological construct of reconciliation
through grace is more far-reaching and productive 	than the
concept of "atonement 	for sin."
The doctrine of the atonement, while a valid and necessary
component of a theology of redemption from sin, is too narrow a
construct 	on which 	to develop 	a strategy 	and 	practice 	of
intervention by which saving grace can enter into the psycho-
therapeutic 	process.
Why is the doctrine of the atonement too narrow for this?
Precisely because the doctrine itself tends to reflect an inherent
dichotomy between an objective atonement in terms of God's
saving action in Christ on the 	one hand, and a subjective
appropriation of this work in the person on the other. This is
true whether 	one views the atonement as a vicarious act of
God's love that took place "on behalf' 	of sinners or as an
example for motivating sinners to love. Here we see the swing
between the objective and subjective sides of the issue, with no
real union of the two. Again, Otto Weber helpfully comments:
Jesus' work is not to be compared with a legacy which was set up
"objectively" for our benefit and which we must then lay claim to
on the basis of our own knowledge and our own decision. Nor can
it be compared with a payment which someone else has made in
our favor, and which now appears, as it were, on our account
record, and which we then may dispose of as we please. The
personal character of reconciliation opposes all such views.a
God's saving activity includes 	the behavior 	of those who
participate in it, says Weber. This "subjective" 	aspect of the
salvation of God is also part of the saving activity of God, not

-- 113 of 257 --

mE 	GRACE OF GOD AS mERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	113
merely a human appropriation of an objective truth. 9 A doctrine
of so-called substitutionary atonement, continues Weber, does
not mean that Jesus' life and death are a "substitution" for my
life, but an "intervention" 	into it through the incarnation and
resurrection of the "crucified God," to use Jurgen Moltmann's
term.IOIn this way knowledge and love are not subject to the
same polarity or dichotomy, but unite in the personal character
of God's saving activity, which is always contemporary. How
can this be?
The atonement is not based on the historical event of Christ's
death alone. The basis for the atonement is the person of Jesus
Christ, the one who died on behalf of all human beings and then
was resurrected. The atonement is not an "objective" thing that
we as "subjective" 	persons need to appropriate by our own
cognitive act of belief. It is Jesus Christ, the living God, who
graciously encounters us in the growth process.n
We sometimes think of atonement abstractly as a concept or
doctrine 	rather 	than 	as the 	saving activity of God in the
incarnate, crucified, and resurrected Christ-an 	activity that is
personal and contemporary. If this happens, attempts to per-
suade clients to "believe" in the atonement as a basis for feeling
forgiven will come to grief over the subject-object polarity that
Weber warns against. For the kind of intervention that occurs
with 	God's 	saving activity does 	not take place 	through 	a
cognitive grasp of an abstract truth. Rather, the intervention is
through the power and presence of the Holy Spirit. And the
Holy Spirit is not communicated through ideas or concepts, but
through persons.
Here we see what is implied in the statement "when religion
comes to an end, Christianity begins." For if grace is rooted in
religion, there will be no real intervention. And when God does
not intervene into the human situation, religion can be only a
subjective experience, 	with no objective (ontological) reality
originating in God. The counselor who views atonement 	as
merely an objective (metaphysical) value or concept and intro-
duces it into the therapeutic process as a form of"God talk"will
fail on two counts: by thrusting a religious concept into the
therapeutic process and so confusing the therapeutic dynamic;
and by seeking to ground Christian faith in mere dogma.12
My purpose to this point has been to show that a doctrine of
atonement is too narrow a focus on which to build a relationship

-- 114 of 257 --

114 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
between God's saving action and psychotherapy. Rather, atone-
ment is a continuous activity of God's saving grace, which took
place "once 	and for all" in the incarnation, 	crucifixion, and
resurrection 	of Jesus 	Christ, 	but 	which 	also 	includes 	the
sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit in the Christian's 	life.
Where 	religion 	comes to an end 	and 	where 	Christianity
begins is at this point of intervention, or sanctification. Religion
cannot of itself sanctify; it can only point toward the need for
sanctification as a gracious intervention 	and source of healing.
The Christian experience of sanctifying grace, of course, is not a
substitute for religion. The religious life of a Christian in whom
the Holy Spirit dwells is itself sanctified. This means that God
has related the person to himself in such a way that the deepest
religious needs and aspirations of that person are authentically
affirmed and fulfilled.
This is why I prefer the theological concept of reconciliation
to the narrow theme of atonement 	as a way of understanding
grace as intervention and transformation of the self. Reconcilia-
tion suggests encounter, 	it requires 	dynamic movement 	from
both parties, and it encompasses 	the whole self as a psycho-
somatic unity. Reconciliation thus comprises the growth process
described 	in the preceding 	chapter. And reconciliation 	allows
for a mediator, 	a role 	that 	the 	Christian 	therapist 	is well
qualified to fulfill.
The relation of the grace of God to the therapeutic process can
be summarized 	as follows:
• The 	integration 	of the self as a whole person 	includes
adjusting to facts, experiences, 	and limitations in life that
cannot easily be changed;
• 	Therapeutic 	gains can be made that will enable the self to
reinterpret 	and cope with these factors and experiences;
• 	These therapeutic 	gains are relative to the process of the
integration and growth of the self along the life continuum;
these gains are useful to the degree that they achieve this
goal;
• The grace of God brings a new, creative resource to the
ego's task of growth and integration, at the level of personal
and spiritual identity;
• 	The theological concept of sin has its psychological effects

-- 115 of 257 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	115
in isolating 	and weakening 	the ego's power 	to recover
authentic 	personal 	and spiritual 	identity and growth;
• 	The doctrine of the atonement 	from sin through Christ's
life, death, 	and resurrection 	has its psychological 	effect
through the grace of forgiveness and healing, which gives
motive power to the self to experience new life and hope;
• 	This is reconciliation 	at the personal and spiritual level.
The Intervention of Grace and Conversion
The specific intervention 	of grace that heals the individual's
relation to God, others, and self can be understood as a kind of
"conversion." 	Setting aside the narrower concepts of conversion
that tend to stereotype 	a form of religious experience, 	we can
view conversion as a transformation of the self through a process
of change and development.Ia
The origins of conversion 	as a phenomenon 	of orientation
toward God that encompasses the whole of one's life will always
be somewhat ambiguous, especially from a cultural, sociologi-
cal, psychological, and anthropological 	perspective. 	The theo-
logical perspective views the origins of conversion with relative
indifference, 	for it is not a critical issue for theology. What is
essential is that the source of the power motivating change and
growth be grounded in love, particularly in the love of God as
expressed through Jesus Christ. Conversion is the selfs orienta-
tion toward the true source of wholeness, which, for Christian
theology, is God as revealed 	through Christ and experienced
through the power of the Holy Spirit. Conversion, therefore, is
more than a psychological or religious phenomenon. 	It is that
intervention of divine grace that effects change and growth. It is
the experienced 	salvation or healing 	that is God's gift to all
through 	Christ.
It is well known that the Greek word soteria as used in the
New Testament 	means not only "deliverance," 	but "healing."
The frequent 	association 	of the word with deliverance 	from
physical illness in the Synoptic gospels strongly points to this
relationship (cf. Mark 10:52; Luke 8:48; Matt. 9:22). When Peter
is asked by which authority he had healed the lame man at the
gate of the temple (Acts 3:1-10), 	he answered that it came by
the name ofJesus Christ, whom God raised from the dead. Peter
then said that "there is salvation in no one else, for there is no

-- 116 of 257 --

116 	CHfilSTIANS WHO COUNSEL
other name under heaven given among men by which we must
be saved" (Acts 4:12). God's saving work in Jesus Christ was "at
work" through the Holy Spirit's intervention 	in the lives of the
apostles. Thus healing occurred not merely through conveying
information 	about Jesus, 	but 	also through 	the Holy Spirit's
"filling" the apostles with power (Acts 2:4; 3:33, 38; 4:8).14
Through the Holy Spirit, Christians represent in their encoun-
ters with others the presence and transforming power of Christ.
The Christian 	counselor 	experiences 	the sanctifying grace of
Christ through the therapeutic 	relation. This sanctifying grace
breaks the selfs bondage to sin and bonds it to God, allowing
the self freely to seek the meaning of the religious experience.
Conversion, which lies at the heart of sanctification, is not a
one-time event. Nor is it a crisis to be induced for the sake of
alleviating anxiety or distress. Rather, as Karl Barth has said,
conversion
is the affair of the totality of the whole life-moment of [persons]. To
live a holy life is to be raised and driven with increasing
definiteness from the centre of this revealed truth, and therefore to
live in conversion with growing sincerity, depth and precision.us
Conversion must begin outside the self, because it is not a
natural movement of the religious sel£ Instead, it results from
God's intervening grace, which enables the religious self to turn
away from its own striving to receive the gift of God's saving
work. But this beginning has no end; it does not merely become
an "event" of one's historical life. Conversion is the work of the
sanctifying 	Spirit of Jesus 	Christ, 	which 	opens 	up the nar-
rowness 	of individual 	existence 	to existence 	in 	grace 	and
community of life. Thus the call to sanctification in the New
Testament 	is no mere private matter, but is addressed 	to the
collective, or communal, person.
From this we can see that conversion as the saving work of the
sanctifying Spirit of Jesus Christ is a work of grace that promotes
mental health in healing the estranged and narcissistic individ-
ual. The evidences of this ongoing conversion in a person's life
are, first, a confession of faith in Jesus as the truth in which one
believes as an objective fact, and second, a profession of faith
that is marked by love of God, neighbor, 	and self.
When the therapist discerns no evidence of such conversion
in the life of the client, the Holy Spirit may yet enable the client

-- 117 of 257 --

THE GRACE OF GOD AS THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTION 	117
to experience the saving work of Christ. A client may profess
faith in Christ at any point on the continuum of growth. Such a
conversion is not a "shortcut" to mental health, but a resource of
divine grace to enable the therapeutic 	process to become a
sanctifying work of grace.
Here is where the significance of the growth process can again
be seen. When the therapist is a Christian and when presence
and encounter take place between the therapist and the client at
the growth level, the therapist mediates the grace of God. This
kind of intervention 	is appropriate 	for a Christian therapist
because 	it does not use 	therapeutic 	technique 	to produce
conversion to Christ, nor does it make conversion an object of
therapeutic gain. It is also true, however, that the context for the
therapy experience will need to be defined explicitly for the
client at the outset so that the growth goal of experiencing the
grace of God is established as a horizon in which the therapeutic
work can be done. Conversion is not a therapeutic gain. But the
grace of God can work through the intervention of a therapist
who is a believer in Christ, and conversion can be a result
If the client is already a Christian, Christ's sanctifying grace
can search out the sin that may lurk behind the symptoms of
mental illness. The therapist may practice the intervention of
forgiveness and enable the client to move positively through
therapeutic 	techniques 	of healing 	toward mental 	health 	as
therapeutic 	gain and personal wholeness as a reality of self-
perception. 	"Absolution" 	may also take place, the therapist
mediating the grace of God that affirms wholeness.
The theological and liturgical form of absolution is expressed
through the pronouncement 	of forgiveness of sins based on
personal confession of sin and the seeking of God's grace. The
psychological 	effect of absolution 	as "realized 	forgiveness"
includes release from the self-defeating and self-denying cycle
of guilt, shame, and contrition. This manifests itself in renewal
of self-esteem, in openness to change and growth at the personal
and spiritual levels, and in behavior that reflects this inner
experience of grace and forgiveness.
To say that a Christian counselor may serve as an intermediary
for this "absolution" is not to suggest that the therapist replaces
the priest or that psychological release from feelings of guilt
replaces authentic forgiveness of sin. Rather, it is to suggest that
the 	effects of grace as psychological health 	and wholeness

-- 118 of 257 --

118 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
manifest in personal and social relations constitute precisely
what the Bible means by conversion, repentance, and forgive-
ness of sin. Absolution that is merely "pronounced" 	and not
"experienced" 	falls short of being the transforming and renew-
ing grace of God it is intended to be. In my view, Christians who
counsel 	can become 	an important 	agent 	in that process 	of
"realized 	forgiveness."
When the Christian therapist practices the intervention 	of
grace as a sanctifying process of conversion, the Christian client
need not experience a dichotomy between religious experience
and psychotherapy. 	Rather, the therapist will share with the
client an experience of the real presence of Christ through the
Holy Spirit's intervention.
In the growth process there 	is no confusion between 	the
sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit and therapeutic technique,
and no confusion between therapeutic gain and the growth goals
of personal and spiritual wholeness. This Christian approach to
therapy 	does 	not 	use 	psychological 	techniques 	to achieve
religious results. Rather, the growth process is the dynamic
context of encounter in which the therapist creates the environ-
ment for the 	grace of God to intervene 	in a gracious and
transforming way.
Summary
In this chapter we have seen that the counselor can mediate
the grace of God in such a way that intervention is made into the
restricted and often dysfunctional life of another person. This
reality of God's grace is not only a motive power for change and
growth, but also a therapeutic resource that makes therapeutic
methods 	even more effective in establishing 	a trajectory of
lifelong growth and wholeness.
"My grace is sufficient," said the risen Christ to the apostle.
This was heard as the Word of God and produced in the hearer
the reality of grace. The Word of God, too, provides a strategy of
intervention for the Christian therapist. The role of Scripture in
the therapeutic process will be the subject for the next chapter.
Notes
1. W. W. Meissner, S.J., M.D., Life and Faith: Psychological
Perspectives on Religious Experience (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown
University Press, 1987), 5.

-- 119 of 257 --

TIIE GRACEOF GOD AS TIIERAPEUTICINTERVENTION 	119
2. Ibid., 7.
3. Ibid., 58.
4. 0. 	Hobart Mowrer, The Crisis of Psychiatry and Religion
(Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1961). Mowrer writes, ..So long as we
subscribe to the view that neurosis is a bona fide 'illness,' without moral
implications or dimensions, our position will of necessity continue to
be an awkward one. And it is here I suggest that, as between the
concept of sin (however unsatisfactory it may in some ways be) and that
of sickness, sin is indeed the lesser of two evils. We have tried the
sickness horn of this dilemma and impaled ourselves upon it. Perhaps,
despite our erstwhile protestations, we shall yet find sin more conge-
nial" (50-51).
5. Otto Weber, Foundations of Dogmatics, vol. 2 (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1983), 327.
6. Walker Becker, ..Healing and Spiritual Disciplines," Journal of
Christian Healing 6, no. 2 (Fall 1984): 35.
7. Carroll E. Simcox, ..On Being Both Christian and Religious,"
Christian Century, (18 April 1984): 398-400.
8. Weber, Foundations of Dogmatics, 2:229.
9. Ibid., 233.
10. Jurgen Moltmann, The Crucified God (New York: Harper & Row,
1974).
11. Otto Weber warns against making the atonement purely "objec-
tive" as an abstract concept. "Hit were the case that God, in the person
and the work (the personal work) of Jesus Christ, simply set up a 'fact'
and then made this fact available to us through the Holy Spirit in the
Church, it would be our task to recognize, agree to, trust in, and
'appropriate' that 'fact.' God would not have acted for us in a valid way,
but would have merely given us a 'chance,' or sent forth a power which
we would have to permit to have its effect on us. The subject-object
polarity this implies would make God's grace in its relationship to us an
object, to which we would have to address ourselves, or which inhered
in us. But, as we saw, God has by no means caused merely a 'chance' to
be made available to us nor initiated the momentum which then leads
to salvation. No, he has made Christ Jesus 'our wisdom, our righteous-
ness and sanctification and redemption' (1 Cor. 1:30). In the Holy
Spirit, our own freedom is God's work, the gift of his free grace"
(Foundations of Dogmatics, 2:412).
12. H. Newton Malony, for example, suggests that "God talk," as the
introduction of a set of religious values based on the assumption of
divine reality and love, can appropriately be used as part of the
psychotherapeutic task. I view this as an attempt to build on an
inherent religious aspect of the self, which may already be part of the
deception of the self and thus needs to experience the intervention and

-- 120 of 257 --

120 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
correction of grace. See "God Talk in Psychotherapy," in Wholeness
and Holiness: Readings in the Psychology/Theology of Mental Health,
ed. H. Newton Malony (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983), 269-80.
13. I have discussed the theological concept of conversion in the
essay "Conversion: Essence of the Christian Story," in Theology, News
and Notes (Pasadena, Calif.: Fuller Theological Seminary, June 1986),
8ff. See in this same issue the essay "Conversion: The Sociodynamic of
Change," by H. Newton Malony, 16ff.
14. For a discussion of the use and meaning of soteria in the New
Testament, see "Redemption" in The New International Dictionary of
New Testament Theology, ed. Colin Brown, vol. 3 (Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1975), 205-21.
15. Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics, vol. 4, pt. 2 (Edinburgh: T. & T.
Clark, 1961), 566.

-- 121 of 257 --

6
The Word of God as
Empowerment 	for Change
She was a young woman in her early twenties. She walked
into my office for her first appointment carrying one of the
largest Bibles I have ever seen. She sat down, holding this
enormous Bible against her chest with both hands wrapped
around it, as though it were either a shield to ward off enemy
spears or a life jacket to save her from drowning. As it turned
out, she probably intended the Bible to be the latter, though I
suspect it acted more as an anchor dragging her under than a life
preserver.
She had been referred to me by a psychologist who was on the
staff of a counseling center not far from the church of which I
was pastor. The psychologist, a Christian, explained to me that
the woman had received 	several hours of therapy with no
apparent results and had no financial resources to pay even a
nominal fee. The center could no longer keep her as a client on
that basis. Would I be willing to provide her with some pastoral
counseling? Of course. This was not the first time as a pastoral
counselor that I had been asked to provide free therapy!
Week after week the woman appeared, clutching this Bible,
her grasp on it growing more convulsive each time she came
close to naming the thing that possessed her. She would sit for
several minutes, hunched over the Bible, unable to speak or
respond.
Finally, in a session in which I discerned and named for her
the thing that she found so terrible and self-destructive, she
looked up and said, "Yes, that is it-is 	God going to kill me?"
121

-- 122 of 257 --

122 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
"What do you think?" I responded, 	not breaking eye contact
for even a second.
For a long while she looked at me. Then she said, "No, I
guess not. So, what do we do now?" Then I noticed that the
Bible was lying in her lap and that her hands were folded,
resting on top of it.
When she came the following week, she did not bring the
Bible with her. From that time I began to think that she would
be healed, 	and I believe 	that in due time she was.
I relate this story to focus our discussion on the role of the
Bible in counseling and psychotherapy. In this case the woman
brought the Bible right into the counseling session. I found out
later that she had been doing this also with the psychotherapist.
While it certainly had symbolic significance for her, it appeared
to have no positive effect on the process of therapy.
As we worked together on her emotional and mental health,
she disclosed a severely conflicted self-concept in which her
view of God as judge 	predominated. 	She began to ask what
"God would think" 	or "what 	God would say" about certain
things we discussed. I would then select incidents in the life of
Jesus and read them to her from my Bible, asking her what she
thought God was saying to her. I sought to awaken in her a
response, or "hearing" of the Word of God, not merely to "tell"
her what the Bible said.
The use of printed material (bibliotherapy) 	in counseling is
widespread, both as "homework" and as a basis for intervention
during the therapy process. Does the Bible fall into this general
category 	of "literature," 	and 	can 	it 	be 	used 	by 	Christian
counselors 	in 	similar 	fashion? 	Does 	the 	Bible, 	because 	it
represents 	a religious 	set of teachings 	based 	on the Judeo-
Christian tradition, provide a therapeutic 	device that enables
the therapist to deal with the religious life and values of the
client?
I find that there is a great deal of confusion and uncertainty
regarding the Bible and counseling. Some Christian counselors
view the Bible as a handbook of moral and spiritual injunctions
by which one can bring a disordered 	and disobedient 	life into
conformity with the Word of God. The primary emphasis in this
case, quite 	obviously, 	is on obedience. 	The 	emotional 	and
mental life is considered to be a reflection of one's spiritual and
moral life. If one is morally and spiritually in conformity with

-- 123 of 257 --

THE WORD OF GOD AS EMPOWERMENT FOR CHANGE 	123
God's Word and God's rule for life, then the other problems will
be resolved. This is a caricature, to be sure, but many counselors
do use the Bible as a tool by which the individual's 	life is
examined and to which submission 	is sought as a spiritual
discipline.
Where this method is used, success is indicated by those who
respond and become faithful members of a Christian community
in which the teaching reinforces the basic principle of obedi-
ence to the Bible. Those for whom this method does not work
tend to be viewed as resisting God or as spiritually and morally
delinquent.
By and large, the students of mine who are preparing for a
ministry of psychotherapy find this approach scandalous. They
have come to regard emotional disturbance as the result of a
complex system of factors that are not directly related to the
selfs 	moral or spiritual 	inclinations. 	Or they 	feel 	it is an
oversimplification to cast emotional problems into the mold of a
spiritual problem. In their view, neither the compulsions and
obsessions of the mind nor the dysfunction of the psyche are
treatable as symptoms of disobedience 	to God. Depression is
not merely 	a sign of sin. There 	are chemical 	imbalances,
neurological disorders, and psychical traumas that must be taken
into account. Many who hold this view conclude that the Bible
has no place in the therapy hour. But this, too, is a caricature.
Yet many Christian therapists have found no way to integrate
the Bible with therapeutic 	practice.
In the 	middle 	range 	between 	these 	approaches 	there 	is
considerable uncertainty and not a little anxiety among Chris-
tian psychologists and counselors concerning the use of the
Bible in counseling. Many do find ways of integrating Bible
readings as homework for their clients, or find it helpful to
suggest meditation on biblical passages as conducive to thera-
peutic 	gain. Some have found it meaningful 	to incorporate
specific biblical passages or teachings into their counseling as a
standard practice. Thus they integrate their Christian faith into
their therapeutic 	practice 	without 	substituting 	the Bible for
psychological 	analysis 	and 	therapeutic 	insight 	into 	human
problems.
The purpose 	of this chapter 	is to work with this middle
ground, avoiding the two extremes. At one extreme the Bible is
viewed as a tool by which most, if not all, emotional problems

-- 124 of 257 --

124 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
can be resolved. On the other extreme, the Bible is excluded
from the therapeutic practice as irrelevant to the purely psycho-
logical or psycho-somatic problems of persons in distress.
In approaching the issue from this perspective, 	I intend to
discuss first the nature of the Bible as Word of God, then the
Word of God as the counsel of God, and finally some approaches
to the use of the Bible in the therapeutic 	context.
The Bible as Word of God
It is common to make the equation that the Bible is the Word
of God. But it is equally common to assume that the Word of
God is merely the Bible. The two statements are not the same.
The Bible is a collection of writings that represent a broad cross
section of literature, centering on the history of the people of
God in the Old Testament and the history of Jesus of Nazareth
and the early church in the New Testament. To say that the
Word of God is merely the Bible is to focus on the Bible
primarily 	as a literary 	work, used 	for religious 	edification,
teaching, moral instruction, and the formulation of doctrines.
Those who view the Bible in this way use it as a "collateral"
source of information and support for the client alongside other
literature that may be used for somewhat the same purpose.
Others might use the Bible as an "authoritative text." That is,
the Bible has a special kind of authority that no other literature
has, because it is the revelation of God in written form. The
concept of "inspiration" 	supports this view, in which not only
the ideas of the Bible are inspired by God, but the very words-
the text itself-is 	God's authoritative word. Proponents of this
view see the Bible in much the same light as Muslims see the
Koran. The Bible would have somewhat the same authority as a
prescription written by a medical doctor, though the element of
"inspiration" is not involved in the latter case. The text becomes
God's "prescription" 	for our instruction 	and edification. The
purpose of inspiration as a technical theological concept is to
guarantee the authenticity 	of the text and, consequently, 	the
"prescription."
The question of authority is a critical issue for the use of any
text, whether the Jewish-Christian Scriptures or the "holy book"
of any religion. Authority is not a self-evident or intrinsic quality
of a Scripture text. Rather, it is a complex set of factors such as

-- 125 of 257 --

IBE WORD OF GOD AS EMPOWERMENT FOR CHANGE 	125
tradition, religious institution, and personal belief system, to
name just a few. The text that a Muslim might cite from the
Koran, for example, would not be recognized as authoritative by
a Christian for whom only the Old and New Testaments are
authoritative. The reverse might be true for a Muslim.
When the Bible is used in counseling as an authoritative text
rather than merely as literature that informs and inspires, one
must look carefully at the nature of the authority claims that
attend its use. Both the counselor and the client would have to
recognize the Bible as authoritative, but their belief systems
may interpret the authority in different ways.
From the perspective of pastoral counseling or of psychother-
apy offered as a service of the church, it is easier to use the Bible
as an authority. But the Christian psychologist in a private
practice 	has to carefully think 	through 	using the 	Bible as
authoritative 	text. If care 	is not 	exercised 	in 	this 	use 	in
counseling, the authority attached to the text of Scripture might
be confused with a bias of interpretation or teaching that the
counselor imposes on the text Or the confusion may come from
the other side. The client may have a quite different perspective
of the role and authority of the Bible than the counselor. My
concept of the authority of the Bible is probably quite different
from that of the young woman who entered my office clutching
it desperately in her arms.
This is not to suggest that the Bible should never be used as
authoritative 	text for giving specific guidance or prescribing
spiritual direction for a client. My point is that we should clearly
understand the source and context of authority when we use the
Bible as a text for these purposes.
Besides viewing the Bible as literature or as authoritative text,
we may see it a third way, as the Word of God. Here we make a
distinction between 	the Bible as literature 	and authoritative
text, and the Word of God that encounters 	us through the
literature and text of the Bible. The Scripture has not replaced
God himself as the one who seeks us and speaks to us through
his Word. Geoffrey Bromiley has helpfully reminded us of this
fact in saying,
The Bible does not replace God. He has not just given us the Bible
and left us to it. He himself is still the one with whom we have to
deal. . . . Even as we consult holy scripture, we are really

-- 126 of 257 --

126 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
consulting God himself in his self-revelation as he came and comes
to us through holy scripture. God indeed says what scripture says,
but this does not imply a direct equation of God and scripture. 1
The Word that became incarnate in Jesus Christ Oohn 1:14)
was a radical reaching out of God's Word into the human
predicament. says Seward Hiltner, and as a consequence, all
persons, "actually seeing and touching, might grasp the intent of
the word of God that had been given all along but never before
in such complete and comprehensive fashion. This was and is
the conviction of the Christian."2 Hiltner adds that Western
Christianity tends to confuse the words of the Bible with the
Word of God. This confuses the authority of the Word of God as
inspired Scripture with the text of Scripture, as though to have
the text or to use the text one is in control of the Word of God.
Karl Barth comments on this same point.
Because the Word of God meets us in the form of the scriptural
word, assimilation means the contemporaneity, homogeneity, and
indirect identification of the reader and hearer of Scripture with
the witness of the revelation. Assimilation means assuming this
witness into our own responsibility.3
This, of course, means that the purpose of the Word of God is to
be heard. The text of Scripture is not authoritative in the
abstract sense of possessing some intrinsic power that can be
manipulated 	by the 	one who uses the 	Bible. Rather, the
authority of the Word of God manifests itself in its power to
affect the "hearing," which is the assimilation of the Word into
one's own responsibility, as Barth has said.
The 	difference between 	hearing the Word of God as a
command to be obeyed, or as instructions to follow, and the
assimilation of the Word, of which Barth speaks, is an essential
difference. The assimilation of the Word is not merely appropri-
ating it as a conceptual truth or moral rule into one's belief
system; it involves a transformation of life. It also involves
assimilating one's life into the event of the Word of God as an
encounter with the reality of God.
Jacob Firet puts it this way:
The issue in hearing and understanding the word, without which
the word is powerless, is an intensely yielded and dedicated
listening such that a person achieves rapport with the word from
within the core of her existence. 4

-- 127 of 257 --

THE WORD OF GOD AS EMPOWERMENT FOR CHANGE 	127
This kind of hearing is the "actualizing of salvation," Firet says.
It is the kind of hearing and response represented by the good
soil in the parable (Mark 4). This clearly points again to a growth
process in which an encounter 	provides a motive power to
change and grow. "My word .•. that goes forth from my mouth,"
says Yahweh through 	the prophet, 	"shall not return 	to me
empty, but it shall accomplish that which I purpose" 	(Isa.
55:11).
We can read the Bible, memorize it, and follow its teaching as
guidelines for behavior and yet not actually have "heard" the
word in the sense of being transformed and changed by it. We
can follow its teachings without knowing the Lord who speaks
through the text. Jesus warns his "hearers" of this very danger
when he says, "On that day many will say to me, 'Lord, Lord,
did we not prophesy in your name, and cast out demons in your
name, and do many mighty works in your name?' And then will
I declare to them, 'I never knew you; depart from me, you
evildoers'" 	(Matt. 7:22-23).
For this reason I did not use the Bible as an authoritative text
to counsel the disturbed 	young woman clutching the Bible.
Rather, I sought to "release" 	the Bible from her grasp, so to
speak, that she might sense the need and the occasion to "hear"
the Word of God. Even then, when she pursued the matter, she
did not ask, "What does the Bible say?" about this matter, but
"What does God say?"
In our counseling we need to look for the moment when the
client seeks the Word of God, has a "faith in the Word of God"
that will lead to the occasion for the Bible to be used. Hiltner
writes,
I wonder if this faith is not, in however secular a sense, an implicit
belief that the word of God will speak although not necessarily in
the time span we would ideally hope for. Such a view is not
dissimilar to a belief in revelation in the theological sense. The
counselor must have patience, even at times near the limits of his
endurance. But if he has this faith and is doing everything he can
based on knowledge, then he does well to endure and wait for
God's word, or its secular equivalent, to break through.5
I am not sure what Hiltner means by a "secular equivalent" to
the Word of God. Perhaps he means that the Word will break
through in a nonreligious form or situation. If so, I fully concur,

-- 128 of 257 --

128 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
for God's Word itself breaks into the world culture, coming in a
human language, a "nonholy" form, in order to encounter the
person within one's own human and, yes, secular context. We
surely do not need to create a religious "point of contact" for the
Word of God to speak and be heard!
We are told by Luke that a great multitude came to Jesus to
"hear him" and "to be healed" (6:17). "He who has ears to hear,
let him hear," said Jesus (Mark 4:9). In hearing there is health,
we could say, with respect to the power of the Word of God in
the counseling process. But this means we do not begin with
teaching general or universal concepts supported by Bible texts
and then move to more specific guidelines or prescriptions for
health. Rather, the act of hearing is always a specific act and thus
the Word of God always comes with a specific "address" to it.
The Word of God as the Counsel of God
The fact that God has spoken and that the written Scriptures
are the Word of God does not mean that God does not continue
to speak through the Scripture. God has spoken and still speaks,
the Reformers believed, especially Calvin. According to Calvin,
the highest proof of Scripture as the Word of God is the fact that
God in person 	speaks in 	it (dei loquentis persona).6 The
authority of Scripture is thus the "counsel" 	of God in it, we
might say.
The action of the Word is God's "interacting" through it with
the person who hears. The counsel of God is not merely advice
or instruction, which remains in a kind of neutral zone waiting
to be appropriated by the hearer. Nor is the counsel of God
identical to the voice of the prophet, or "counselor." The role of
the therapist in the growth process, like that of the preacher, is
as an intermediary 	in this interaction of the Word with the
hearer. "When God comes in his word," says Firet,
then by that token he has turned in love toward people; then he
has acted on behalf of people; then he has communicated with
people. When God comes in his word, then by that token salvation
is there; then people are being healed and situated in the peace,
the righteousness, and the life of the Kingdom.7
The word of God is not merely a movement of sound waves, a
vibration in the air. The counsel of God is not merely a word of

-- 129 of 257 --

THE WORD OF GOD AS EMPOWERMENT FOR CHANGE 	129
wisdom or even 	a heavily 	weighted 	admonition. 	It is the
dynamic presence 	of God that penetrates 	self-deception and
unmasks the pretenses of the heart. "Is not my word like fire,
says the Lord, and like a hammer which breaks the rock in
piecesr• 	(Jer. 23:29). The word of God is "living and active"
(Heb. 4:12), it is the "power of God" (I Cor. 1:18), and it is able
to "save your souls" (James 1:21).
The Word of God cannot be isolated into a text and then used
out of context as an authoritative command. The context of the
Word is not merely 	its literary context, but the context of
"hearing" -the 	context of encounter, presence, and faith. To
view the 	Word of God as the 	counsel 	of God is thus 	to
understand 	that 	the 	Word is itself the 	motive power 	that
engenders 	change. 	It 	produces 	understanding 	and 	change
because it is a word of truth. It is not a deceptive word, nor does
it permit deception in the one who hears it.8
The Word of God is not merely a biblically based form of
counseling, as though it could be added to therapeutic tech-
nique 	as a Christian 	form of psychology. The 	concept 	of
counseling as a pastoral therapeutic has already been "psycholo-
gized" through the introduction of psycho-therapeutic dynamics
into pastoral care. The reverse of this, attempting to "Christian-
ize" psychotherapy by adding Scripture as a religious context
and therapeutic tool, does not approach what I have in mind
here. 	The 	Word of God is a personal 	encounter 	and 	the
transforming presence 	of God himself.
The growth process (agogic situation) is created not only by
quoting or reading the Bible, but through the encounter of one
human being with others in which one intermediates the reality
of God for the other. Where this situation exists, it is because of
the presence of faith inspired by the Holy Spirit. This encounter
demands the Christian's active belief, so that God's Word may
manifest itself as being heard, believed, and enacted through
the life of the Christian.
This encounter breaks the "silence of the gods," as Komelis
Miskotte once put it. "When the gods are silent they are silent
everywhere; 	when YHWH speaks, he speaks somewhere, at
some definite place; and in this •somewhere' is to be found the
Word which was always the life and light of men." 9
The purpose or power of the Word of God, says Miskotte, is to
give knowledge and life. All religions include some knowledge,

-- 130 of 257 --

130 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
but not all can lead to life. The unique 	nature of the Word of
God is that it is a knowledge 	of God, which leads to essential
life.
The courage to live grows out of the strength of knowing, which is
essentially identical with the ability to know oneself as one who is
known, to accept oneself as one who is forever accepted, to affirm
oneself as one who is affirmed by God. This is the way in which
and this is the reason why all the abundance of the tree of life lies
in the knowledge 	of YHWH.10
The gospel of John tells us that the Word that became flesh is
the source of life (1:4). Jesus himself said, "I came that they may
have life, and have it abundantly" 	(John 10:10). When dealing
with the religious scribes, who had become specialists in using
the Scripture as an authoritative text, Jesus said, "You search the
scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life;
and it is they that bear witness to me; yet you refuse to come to
me that you may have life" (John 5:39-40).
When Christians who practice counseling and psychotherapy
enter into the growth process expecting the Word of God to be
present, to be heard, and to heal, they use Scripture to facilitate
this effect.
When I believe that the client coming with an implicit need to
"hear" 	the Word of God, even 	if this need 	is expressed 	in
nonreligious 	concept or words, I am better prepared 	to let the
Word of God be heard. 	I am encouraged 	to believe 	that the
Scripture will awaken that hearing to an authentic experience 	of
God, who is the source of essential 	life, not just the pragmatic
form of life.
How 	is 	this 	done? 	With 	clinical 	intuition 	and 	spiritual
discernment, 	coupled with a knowledge 	of the Word of God as
"story" 	or "paradigm."
Using the Bible in a Therapeutic Context
We recall that Jacob Firet distinguishes 	between 	the agogic
moment and the hermeneutic 	moment. The word hermeneutic
basically means the practice or art of interpreting 	something and
expounding 	the meaning of it. The hermeneutic 	moment is the
situation, 	or 	moment, 	that 	releases 	the 	motive 	power 	for
understanding. The agogic moment releases the motive power

-- 131 of 257 --

THE WORD OF GOD AS EMPOWERMENT FOR CHANGE 	131
for change and growth. This is what I am calling the growth
process. 11
There is, however, another way of seeing the hermeneutic
moment as part of the dynamic of the Word "coming to us" and
thereby 	producing 	a response 	in us. Gerhard 	Ebeling, 	for
example, suggests that the Word is not really the object of
understanding, as though we could grasp it abstractly with the
mind and thus bring it under our control. Rather, the Word
brings something to understanding; it has a hermeneutic func-
tion. The Word as the reality of God passes through language
and relates the hearer to the source of the Word-that 	is, to the
being of God in his Word.a
In the Old Testament the Word of God had the power of
blessing or cursing, but it was not some magical or secret word.
The Word was intelligible and came in a situation where the
hearers could be affected by the hearing. They had a "choice,"
in effect, either to hear with faith and so take the way which
leads to life and health or, in "not hearing," to take the way that
leads to self-destructiveness and futility (cf. Deut. 30:lff; Isa.
45:19; 48:16).
The surprising thing about the Word of God is that it does not
come in strange sounds or unintelligible syllables, but instead
sounds ordinary and familiar. "God speaks our mother tongue"
(note the experience at Pentecost, Acts 2:8, 11).13 The Word of
God is heard in a relationship 	that already has a basis of
understanding, 	a relationship 	that was there before. In this
relationship a genuine encounter takes place; in this growth
process the hermeneutical moment takes place.
The point 	is this: The Word of God seeks hearing 	and
response. 	It demands 	that those 	who hear the 	Word will
assimilate it into their lives. For this to take place, there must be
a context for addressing the totality of the person's life, treating
the individual as a unity.
In the approach to counseling I have attempted to develop in
this book, an encounter 	is created through a counseling or
therapeutic relationship in which persons are addressed as a
psycho-spiritual unity. The therapeutic techniques used can aim
at specific therapeutic gains in a context that also addresses the
larger goals and values of personal life.
The growth process produces the context for the hermeneuti-
cal moment. Or to put it another way, the encounter through the

-- 132 of 257 --

132 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
counseling relationship releases a motive power for change that
is also the motive power for understanding. Faith, or a person's
openness to God as the source of life, is thus the motive power
for understanding. To say that one has heard and understood the
Word of God without believing and growing toward the life of
faith is to deny the truth.
This rather technical discussion explains to me the dynamics
of what took place when I counseled the young woman who was
desperately clutching her Bible. I think she saw me as a person
who has a relationship 	with God, probably because 	of my
pastoral role. She appeared 	to verify this through 	our lli.st
sessions together, in which she found it possible to trust me at
the human level also. A growth process resulted 	where the
reality of God entered 	in despite 	the unreality 	of her own
structure of confusion and distress.
The Bible was displaced from the role of standing between
her and God, and she found it possible to question directly,
through me, her relation to God. Then, when she began to ask
what God meant in her life, she entered into the hermeneutic
moment, when understanding could take place as an interven-
tion into her confused perceptions of self and God.
When she questioned whether God would now "kill her," I
forced her to answer the question herself out of the reality of the
growth process. She was thus confronted with the choice of
understanding the Word of God as a blessing or a curse. When
she was able to say, "I guess not," she had come to a new
understanding 	of God and herself, and a motive power for
understanding was released. As she continued to work on her
self-perception on a clinical basis, she also came to evidence a
motive power for change and growth.
I introduced the use of the Bible through a series of selected
stories that I read to her without comment. Then I asked her to
interpret these stories from the context of her growth process. If
I had asked her to read the Bible for herself, either silently or
out loud, it would not have had the same effect. The Scripture
needed to be displaced from the center of her distortion and
placed in the context of the growth process. I accomplished this
by reading the Bible to her so that the Word of God came to her
in the "familiar" voice of our relationship. By this means a new
"hermeneutical moment" had been created for her. She did not

-- 133 of 257 --

THE WORD OF GOD AS EMPOWERMENT FOR CHANGE 	133
have to agree or disagree with my ..interpretation"; she had to
provide the interpretation hersel£
This seems quite consistent with Jesus' 	method of using
parables and stories to bring his hearers to a new understanding.
In telling the story of the Good Samaritan, for example (Luke
10:25-37), Jesus ended with a question, "Which of these three,
do you think, proved neighbor to the man who fell among the
robbers?" When the man answered, ..The one who showed
mercy," Jesus simply said, ..Go and do likewise."
Over and over again, Jesus forced his listeners 	into the
hermeneutic moment-they 	had to announce the interpretation
and so assimilate themselves into the event of a story. The
stories were created out of a landscape familiar to the listeners,
and they were told by Jesus, a person familiar to them through
his teaching and ministry.
True, the Bible also contains ..prescriptions," 	admonitions,
doctrines, and guidelines for living. But these ..prescriptions"
are addressed to believers who are presumed to be in a position
of understanding. Where understanding has become distorted-
and this is one way of understanding both emotional and mental
problems-using 	Scripture as authoritative text does not seem
to be effective.
Counselors who wish to bring a Christian perspective to their
practice can use the 	Bible effectively as a ..hermeneutical
moment." To be most effective, the counselor should be so
familiar with Scripture that she can "tell" its basic stories or
paradigms in the context of the therapy process without using
the Bible itsel£ Doing so. liberates the Word of God from its
encasement in the "literature" of Scripture and embodies it in
the 	language 	and 	relationship 	already 	..in place." 	This 	is
particularly effective when we are counseling non-Christians or
those who view the Bible in a distorted or stereotyped way.
The Bible is used most effectively when the hermeneutical
moment has already occurred and both the therapist and the
client can approach the text in their ..co-humanity."
It is up to each counselor to decide whether to use the Bible
in therapy. There is, however, no reason not to use it, provided
that this Word has not become 	"dis-incarnate" 	and is not
brought in as something alien to the therapeutic relation itself.
The Word of God should be a friend. If it sounds strange to the

-- 134 of 257 --

134 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
ear, the ear has become estranged from the heart. The Word,
even in its strangeness, can provide healing and growth.
If heaven and earth were created by the "Word of God"
(2 Peter 3:5), then the Word of the Lord that "tells" the glory of
God through this world can also be a "law of the Lord" that
brings blessing and wholeness to his human creatures.
The law of the LoRD is perfect,
reviving the soul;
the testimony of the LoRD is sure,
making wise the simple;
the precepts of the LoRD are right,
rejoicing the heart;
the commandment of the LoRo is pure,
enlightening 	the eyes;
the fear of the LoRo is clean,
enduring forever;
the ordinances of the LoRD are true,
and righteous altogether.
More to be desired are they than gold,
even much fine gold;
sweeter also than honey
and drippings of the honeycomb (Ps. 19:7-10).
Notes
1. Geoffrey Bromiley, God and Marriage (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1980), 2.
2. Seward Hiltner, Theological Dynamics (Nashville: Abingdon,
1972), 172.
3. Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics, vol. 2, pt. 1 (Edinburgh: T. & T.
Clark), 736.
4. Jacob Firet, Dynamics in Counseling (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1986), 37.
5. Hiltner, Theological Dynamics, 176.
6. John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, I.vii.4.
7. Firet, Dynamics in Counseling, 29.
8. Firet says, "God does not speak deceptive words; he never says
anything offhandedly to pass the time. His word is truly word and word
of truth. His word names his name: he helps us understand who he is,
what he is for us; he thus makes us other people who may live in the
knowledge of his name and who may call on the name. His word
reveals the truth: he leads us out of our delusions into understanding
and discernment of reality; he changes us so that we do not need to run
our lives by what is deceptive 	and changing. The word of God

-- 135 of 257 --

THE WORD OF GOD AS EMPOWERMENT FOR CHANGE 	135
actualizes salvation; he makes us understand that all things are new,
and causes us to walk in newness of life. His word is the form of his
presence: it is our prerogative to know him in his word and to live with
him, drawing our life from his word" (Ibid., 95).
9. Komelis Miskotte, When the Gods are Silent (London: Collins,
1967), 478.
10. Ibid., 364.
11. Firet, Dynamics in Counseling, 95ff.
12. See, for example, Gerhard Ebeling, Word and Faith (Philadel-
phia: Westminster Press, 1963), 305ff.
13. Firet, Dynamics in Counseling, 96£

-- 136 of 257 --

7
The 	Healing 	Praxis
of Prayer
In the modem view, says theologian Donald Bloesch, "if you
speak 	to God, that's 	prayer; 	if God 	speaks 	to you, 	that's
schizophrenia." 1 As a phenomenon 	of the religious instincts of
humanity, prayer as a form of addressing the deity, by whatever
form and by whatever name, is probably found in every culture
and in every age.
Christians also pray. Jesus prayed, as did the people oflsrael.
Jesus taught his disciples to pray, and the early church practiced
prayer as a central part of their community life as well as a form
of ministry to the sick.
"Is any among you sick?" wrote James. "Let him call for the
elders of the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him
with oil in the name of the Lord; and the prayer of faith will save
the sick man, and the Lord will raise him up" (James 5:14).
Jesus and the early Christians considered prayer to be effective
both in the lives of people who pray and in the lives of people
who are the object of prayer.
In chapter 	1 I mentioned 	Martha, who told her Christian
counselor, "You never prayed with me." Yet she testified that
therapy caused changes in her life that her own prayers failed to
bring about. Sue Johnson, as a Christian who counsels, wants to
know whether prayer is appropriate during a counseling session.
She prays for her clients as part of her own life of prayer, but she
has not yet discovered the place of prayer in therapy itself. This
chapter is written to answer questions about prayer as related to
the therapy process.
136

-- 137 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	137
Should a Christian therapist think of prayer as a means to
healing persons through the therapeutic process? Does prayer
heal memories and renew the emotional life as well as alter the
mental process so as to produce mental health?
In addressing these questions I will discuss first the nature of
prayer as Christian praxis and then the use of prayer as a healing
praxis.
Prayer as a Form of Christian Praxis
Praxis, we will recall from chapter 4, is not merely applying a
theory in practice, nor making a product according to a design.
Praxis is discovering truth through actions so that truth, as the
telos (goal) of the action, is revealed. For praxis, the goal is
included in the act itself, bringing together the means and the
end in a unity of action. The praxis of Christian truth is therefore
transformational in nature. Christian praxis is encountering the
reality of God through the actions in which that reality becomes
manifest. Praxis does not bring the reality of God into the
situation through applying a procedure, but discovers and makes
manifest the reality of God through action.
In this view, prayer does not become a way of manipulating
God to create a certain effect. Prayer is a growth process in the
sense that the motive power for change or growth is not lodged
in the one who prays, but comes to the one who prays (and the
one prayed for) as the power and reality of God.
Prayer 	is 	a 	dialogical 	activity, 	says Donald 	Bloesch. 	It
necessarily involves words and is a "two-way conversation"
between the Creator and the creature. 2 This implies that God
does indeed talk back to the one who prays! But we should not
be misled by the emphasis on "talk" in this understanding 	of
prayer.
1. Prayer as Shared Life. Jacques Ellul, a lay theologian in the
Reformed Church of France, argues, with Bloesch, that prayer is
a form of communication with God, though he suggests that
prayer is not a formal discourse using a common language.
Rather, he says, prayer is shared life with God and therefore is
not confined to verbal statement. The verbal form of prayer is
not useless, Ellul says, but if God did not turn the language of
prayer into an encounter with him, the words of a prayer may

-- 138 of 257 --

138 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
only be a monologue and not a dialogue at all.3 We are reminded
of the way in which Jesus described the Pharisee who "stood
and prayed thus with himself' 	(Luke 18:11).
The predicament of "modern man," says Ellul, is that we are
in a crisis of language in which words can no longer attain the
level of speech.• T. F. Torrance agrees, saying we have suffered
a culture split wherein 	language has become detached 	from
being with the result that words have only a syntactical relation
and no real semantical relation 	with personal 	reality. 5 This
means 	that 	words 	only 	connect 	with 	other 	words 	in 	the
grammatical form (syntactical) and do not really refer to a reality
beyond this grammatical form. (A semantical relation is between
a word and a reality that it signifies.) If the words of our prayers
only have meaning in a grammatical or existential form, then
God as the (semantic) reality of prayer is not involved at all.
For 	Ellul, 	this 	means 	that 	often we are only using 	the
"language of prayer" but not real prayer itself. Only words are
spoken, not prayer through words. When we "talk with God" in
prayer, we may only be using words that have not yet become
"speech." To become speech, continues Ellul, prayer must be
an authentic address of the 'T' 	to the "Thou" that constitutes
the reality of God. For prayer to be authentic "speech" whereby
we "hear" what God says in answer to prayer, we must let go of
the manipulation and power of words. We must be open toward
God, realizing that we cannot pray for an "objective good" but
only for the will of God. Ellul puts it this way:
In the act of praying, I am signifying that the good is not an
objective reality known in advance, with evil as an equivalent
opposite, as though I had a choice to make between two things. I
am signifying that, to the contrary, evil is a condition, a situation
which affects me, and that it is not visible to the eye like a tumor in
healthy flesh. I am signifying that the good is not a source for
objectifiable commandments, but that the good is the will of God.
Even if I am not a theologian, that is what I mean when I pray.&
The will of God, for Ellul, is precisely the only justification for
prayer, for it creates in us the need to pray and answers our
prayers by orienting us toward a life of wholeness and holiness.
This shared life with God is also the source of our own good and
the good of our neighbor. While this sounds quite mystical, it
really is concrete and practical. I can bring specific needs to God

-- 139 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	139
in prayer-the 	need for physical healing, for courage in bearing
a burden, or for a solution to a problem. But these "needs" are
not identical with the "shared life" with God that constitutes
prayer. Even Jesus concluded through prayer that the will of
God was more to be desired than to have "this cup removed
from me" (cf. Luke 22:42). Paul, to whom we referred in chapter
5, prayed three times to have his "thorn in the flesh" removed,
only to discover 	through 	prayer 	that 	the 	grace of God is
sufficient. As Ellul reminds us, the "good" is not identical with
the need 	that prompts prayer, but the good is experienced
through prayer in the form of shared life with God-in 	some
instances, in the form of the need met and the "thorn" removed!
Ellul speaks of prayer in much the same way as I have spoken
of Christian praxis-as 	an encounter with the reality of God
through action. Prayer is not a way of manipulating the power of
God so as to "produce" 	a result, but a means of encountering
God through language and words.
There is a kind of "primitive prayer," says Ellul, that was
marked by an "economy of scarcity." The individual 	person
generally suffered from an impoverishment 	of goods and of
"good luck." Thus, as the beggar expected a handout from the
passing stranger, the one who prayed expected a handout from
God. So, too, primitive prayer was bound up with an infantile
and paternalistic 	relationship 	with God. In such prayer the
person acts like a little child afraid to accept responsibilities,
putting the decision making on God. 7
As a result, in a materialistic age when goods and good luck
can be secured through a variety of means more reliable than
prayer, the modern person may view prayer as superstitious and
magical. It may be comforting to "talk with God," but it is more
helpful to talk to one's therapist. In this context, if the therapist
turns to prayer and begins to "talk with God," some may think
this reinforces 	the 	"infantile" 	need 	to project on God the
responsibility for solving one's problems. But if we view prayer
as a "shared life" with God and others and as a "growth process"
in which God is really involved, "God talk" will not intrude into
the therapeutic moment, but will have integrity based on the
integrative nature of the process itself.
2. Prayer as Victory Over Nothingness. Does prayer contrib-
ute to the therapeutic process itself? I believe it does. Prayer is

-- 140 of 257 --

140 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
more than "talking with God." Prayer is crossing a boundary; to
use the suggestive phrase of Ellul, it is the means of "making a
lawful entrance 	. . . into the closed world. The sacred is, in
reality, the delineation of the boundary of something forbidden,
of a mystery, the establishing of a certain number of fixed points
·of reference, the designation of a meaning. "8
On the other side of this boundary, which seems to close in
upon us, leaving us powerless and oppressed, lies the mystery of
life with its resources of hope, faith, and love. Christian prayer is
not the instinctive, primitive prayer of the poverty-stricken. Nor
is Christian prayer an infantile movement away from personal
responsibility and decision making toward an invisible "parent"
who will take over. Christian prayer is communication with
Jesus Christ, who "crossed the boundary" through his incarna-
tion.
Christian prayer stands over and against primitive prayer,
which seeks to cross the boundary through superstition, magic,
or even human sacrifice. Christ's incarnation creates a basis for
prayer in the continual coming to our situation by that same
living God. Jesus' prayer to his Father in John 17 reveals that
the boundary separating the divine mystery from our human
situation is now overcome. All prayer to God now takes place
within that "dialogue" and relationship between Father and Son
that continues 	to empower Christian prayer. Jesus not only
upholds the human situation through his own flesh-and-blood
relationship with the Father, but also gives an insight into the
mystery of the will of God, that we should be kept from the evil
one Oohn 17:15) and "sanctified" 	in the truth 	of his word
(v. 16). Finally, he shares his intimacy with the Father with
those for whom he prays-his 	disciples and also those who will
believe in him through their words (v. 20).
Christian prayer, therefore, is based on the incarnation of God
in Christ, yields insight into the will of God for our wholeness
and holiness, and creates an intimacy by which the life of God
himself is communicated to those who pray.
A woman (let's call her Diane) who felt trapped 	in her
marriage came for counseling. Her husband constantly abused
her emotionally, but she followed what she thought was a
biblical 	mandate 	to 	"be 	submissive 	to 	him" 	in 	hopes 	of
changing his attitudes 	and actions. She had very little self-
esteem, which she interpreted 	as a spiritual form of humility

-- 141 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	141
before God-not 	to "think of [herself] more highly than [she]
ought to think" 	(Rom. 12:3). Her 	strong sense 	of spiritual
obedience to God in this situation led her to a deep sense of
despair and even doom, for despite her "prayers" for God to
change her husband, he continued to humiliate and abuse her.
Diane was caught in the "nothingness" 	that Ellul describes,
where God was on the other side of the boundary and her
prayers appeared futile.
Diane asked me to pray for the transformation of her husband
so that she would be able to fulfill her calling of God to live in
this marriage. Instead I led her to pray that God would come to
her on "this side" of that boundary of despair and reveal his will
for her. At first she protested 	that God's will was perfectly
clear-she 	was to be submissive to her husband as a way of
changing his behavior. But, in fact, he already professed to be a
Christian and was a seminary student preparing for the ministry!
I read some Scripture passages, in the manner suggested in the
previous chapter, and asked Diane to interpret for herself what
God desired in terms of her worth as a person and the quality of
her life as a woman and a wife. She discovered that Jesus was
"on her side," so to speak, willing her to move toward a position
of health and wholeness. Her own prayers offered during the
counseling sessions began to explore this "shared life" with
God through Christ.
As her sense of worth grew along with an assurance of God's
will for her and her children, Diane was able to confront her
husband with his responsibility to share this life of wholeness
with God and with her. Reacting with anger and even threats of
violence, he left seminary and abandoned the marriage, with the
result that she finally initiated and received a divorce. While she
grieved a lost relationship, she discovered through the praxis of
prayer a new shared life with Christ that continues to be a
source of growth and life for her.
3. Prayer as "Making History." Ellul suggests that we see
Christian prayer as a form of "making history" through the
power 	of the 	Word of God incarnate 	and present 	through
proclamation and sacrament. The Word proclaimed and em-
bodied in sacrament must also be enacted in prayer, Ellul says,
for the incarnation of God in Christ to be a continuing and
present reality.9 Because prayer constitutes the meeting place

-- 142 of 257 --

142 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
between 	God's 	Word and the 	human 	word in the 	form of
dialogue, it has the power of "making history." By "history"
Ellul means purposeful 	and meaningful human existence that
embodies 	God's design 	for the present 	and his will for the
future.
Prayer gives consistency to life, to action, to human relations, to
the facts of human existence, both small and great. Prayer holds
together the shattered fragments of the creation. It makes history
possible. Therefore it is victory over nothingness.10
This "victory over nothingness," 	as Ellul puts it, is the source
of all 	true 	healing 	of persons. 	The 	struggle 	for personal
existence is a form of combat against this "mystery" 	of noth-
ingness that seeks to undermine all efforts at self-validation and
self-affirmation. The therapist who is a Christian can enter into
this "combat" because the incarnation of God in Jesus Christ
has crossed over the boundary and entered 	into this arena of
personal existence, where the threat of "nothingness" 	is always
present.
The apostle Paul says that Christ is the "image of the invisible
God" and that he is before all things. "In him all things hold
together," or cohere (Col. 1:15, 17). As the incarnation of God,
Christ has "disarmed the principalities 	and powers," triumph-
ing over them (Col. 2:15).
4. Prayer as "Deliverance From Evil." The Christian therapist
has the Spirit of Christ present as a discerning Spirit, yielding
insight 	into the struggle for existence 	against the powers of
nothingness. 	Christians 	pray to exercise this insight through
intimate communion with the Spirit of God in Christ 	Christian
prayer is therefore much more than meditation; it is much more
than focusing and centering one's being on a God or the concept
of a God who is hidden beyond the boundary of our temporal
and tangible word of experience. 	Christian prayer, along with
the proclaimed Word and sacrament, is the continuing 	power
and presence 	of incarnation as a healing and integrating force,
overcoming the fragmenting and destructive 	"powers of evil."
In Christian prayer, the petition "deliver us from evil" both
acknowledges 	our 	vulnerability 	to 	the 	destructive 	powers
around us and attacks those powers through the presence 	of
Christ in us.

-- 143 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	143
When the disciples implored Jesus, ..Teach us to pray," they
did 	not 	want 	to learn 	a method. 	Rather, 	they 	wanted 	to
experience the same effect in their lives that they saw in his life.
They 	saw that he 	overcame the 	powers 	that tempted 	and
tormented them. They observed in him an intimacy with God as
Father that enabled him to be whole and holy in the face of
fragmenting forces around him and conflicting voices within
him: "Now is my soul [psyche] troubled. And what shall I say,
'Father save me?'" 	(John 12:27). They saw the liberation and
healing that prayer brought to others when all other "methods"
failed (for example, see Matt. 17:14-20, where Jesus heals the
epileptic boy after the disciples had failed).
Should a Christian pray in the context of psychotherapy? The
answer is yes. A Christian who is undergoing therapy should
pray, and should be taught to pray, in the same sense as Jesus
taught his disciples to pray. A Christian therapist should pray
with and for the client so that the process of therapy might
become 	a structure 	of "history" 	through 	which 	the 	client
triumphs over the power of "nothingness" and experiences the
reality and power of the kingdom of God.
This is exactly what occurred 	for Diane. As long as her
spiritual life remained attached to the destruction of her self-
worth under the assumption that this was the "will of God," she
had no real personal 	history. As she began to experience God's
power in her life, she began, through prayer, to construct a sense
of history. She now discovered that God was working with her,
not against her. Despite the loss of her marriage, she discovered
through 	prayer a "shared 	life" with God, giving her life a
historical structure, rather than leaving her trapped in a cycle of
doom and despair.
5. Prayer as "Preparation of the Way." When Christian prayer
is seen as a "preparation of the way" rather than as a "method"
or technique, the matter of when or how to pray in the context of
the therapy hour will not be a problem. It is in the "preparation
of the way of the Lord," said Dietrich Bonhoeffer, rather than in
"method" 	that the kingdom of God comes to us with power,
healing, and hope. 11 The "when" 	and "how to" of prayer are
matters 	of having appropriate 	clinical 	intuition, 	a sense 	of
spiritual discernment, 	and confidence in one's own form and

-- 144 of 257 --

144 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
style of prayer. Whatever method of prayer is used, it should be
congruent with the context and process of the therapy itself.
The deeper issue related to the process of psychotherapy is
how one views prayer as it relates to God's work of healing.
When prayer is understood as a form of "preparation of the
way," through which our "closed-off' world is invaded by the
liberating and healing power of God, then we will understand
what Christian prayer is. When we understand that Christian
prayer is not our "talk with God," but real "speech" -in 	which
he is present in such a way that the language of prayer as a
boundary is broken through by a real dialogue and communion
with him-then 	we will know why we pray.
What do I expect when I pray with and for a client in a
counseling session? I expect that concepts and images of God as
an invisible but powerful source of healing and hope become
real to me through the human and personal reality of speech.
That is, I expect that concepts of God become communion with
God-his 	presence taking hold of our presence. Thus the way is
prepared for our response to his Word, as a new insight into our
need, our worth, and our relatedness to him. The client will
experience the reality of God as a partner in the process of
mental and emotional healing.
I expect, when I pray with and for a client, that the feeling
that God is an accuser or judge will be replaced by the feeling
that God is an advocate of the client over and against the
accusing and incriminating conscience. I expect that the client
will be astounded to discover that a prayer for the forgiveness of
sins carries with it the assured response-your 	sins are forgiven,
on earth and in heaven. Thus the way is prepared for a transfer
of power from the powerful to the powerless, from the eternal
and unreachable ideal, to the historical and assessible self. The
client will experience a feeling of relief and rest, with new
psychical energy to continue the therapeutic process with a
renewed spirit of anticipation and hope.
I also expect, when I pray with and for a client, that the
unexpected 	will often happen. 	I expect that there 	will be
surprises. In some cases and in some situations there is the
surprise that nothing seems to have happened. At other times
there is the surprise that healing appears to be almost instanta-
neous. The sense of surprise enables us to practice prayer even
when there appears to be no visible effect, and to resist the

-- 145 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	145
temptation to make out of prayer a method for manipulating the
Word of God. In both cases we are only preparing the way.
Prayer as a Healing Praxis
Some Christian therapists practice a form of prayer related to
the therapeutic gain of "healing of memories." This prayer as a
healing praxis works to remove the traumatic emotional experi-
ences in the past that continue to plague a person in the present.
Many Christian therapists 	feel that prayer releases 	Christ's
power and that they can use guided imagery as a form of prayer
in order to provide a kind of "inner healing."
It appears axiomatic to behavioral scientists that negative and
self-destructive 	images can actually destroy 	mental 	health.
Likewise, it appears to many that constructing positive images
tends to produce good mental health. The recent literature on
"inner 	healing," 	which focuses on the healing 	of negative
memories (images) through the creation of positive self-images,
testifies to the therapeutic implications of the imaging process.
More recently, Christian counselors have been attracted to the
therapeutic possibilities of inner healing. At the popular level
this trend is represented by the book written by John and Paula
Sandford, The Transformation of the Inner Man, identified on
the cover as "The Most Comprehensive Book on Inner Healing
Today."12
It should be noted, however, that the Sandfords do not agree
that the self-image of a person can be healed or renewed. On the
contrary, they insist that inner 	healing 	does not erase old
memories, but transforms them by relating them to a totally new
self-image-that 	of being completely victorious through the
grace of Jesus Christ. 13"The inner being is not good that it
should be restored," argue the Sandfords, "but it is put to death
in order that a new being may arise within us."14In support of
this astounding statement they cite Romans 7:18-19: 	"For I
know that nothing good dwells within me, that is, in my flesh. I
can will what is right, but I cannot do it."
My response is that this does not say that the "inner being" is
not good, but rather that nothing good dwells within. The
Sandfords do not cite the text that follows: "For I delight in the
law of God, in my .inmost self" (7:22). The same Paul who
confesses 	his 	psychological 	and 	spiritual 	ambivalence 	can

-- 146 of 257 --

146 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
nonetheless 	claim that his inner 	being 	is good, because 	it
'"remembers," or delights in, the law of God.
We are 	reminded 	here 	of the 	way the 	Old 	Testament
describes 	the mental process. For the Hebrews, 	the mental
process involves "receiving" 	an image or perception 	into the
soul, so that what "rises up" in the heart becomes an intention
or will to act. For us to say that it did not "come upon my heart"
or "come into my heart" is to say that it was not our intention or
will. God says, through the prophet Jeremiah, that the people of
Judah 	did 	evil, 	because 	they 	did 	that 	which 	"I 	did 	not
command, nor did it come into my mind" Ger. 7:31).
When the people responded to Jehoash's plea to contribute to
the repair of the temple each was to contribute (in addition to
the money assessed) "the money which a man's heart prompts
him to bring into the house of the Lord" (2 Kings 12:4). The
Hebrews 	did not first of all "think" 	as a neutral or abstract
mental process and then "decide" or will an action. Instead, for
them, the soul, or inner being, received impressions that then
"rise within the heart" as an intention.
This is exactly what is meant by praxis. The goal of the action
is included in the intention so that no dichotomy exists between
the 	concept 	or idea 	and 	the 	action 	in which 	the 	idea 	is
completed. Memory is thus grounded in concrete actions and
outcomes, rather than merely in abstractions of the mind.
When the soul "remembers" 	something, it does not have an
objective memory image of some thing or event 	Instead, an
image is called forth in the soul and assists in determining its
direction or action. To remember the works of Yahweh and to let
one's acts be determined by his will is the same process. That
which is not remembered 	passes out of the soul and has no
bearing on determining 	the will or action of a person. The
Israelite cannot "image memory" as an abstract image without
affecting the direction of life. An Old Testament scholar, John
Pedersen, 	says of this mental process of the Israelites:
New and large experiences make one forget the lesser; they are
displaced from the soul and exercise no in8uence. When the new
heavens and the new earth are created, then the Isarelites shall no
more remember the former, and it shall not rise in their heart (Isa.
65:17; Jer. 3:16). It means that the new order of things shall fill
their soul, so that the old no more stirs any emotion in it.15

-- 147 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	147
Although the phrase 	"healing 	of memories" 	is used as a
therapeutic goal, I believe that a more biblical concept would be
the "healing of memory." Memory itself, not memories, is the
key to health. Scripture seems to emphasize the forgiveness of
God, which can be the basis of self-forgiveness.
We are told that God has forgiven us, and I believe it. Does
that mean that his memories have been healed? "Remember not
the sins of my youth," cries the Psalmist (Ps. 25:7). "Thou hast
cast all my sins behind 	thy back," testifies the prophet (Isa.
38: 17). "As far as the east is from the west, so far does he remove
our transgressions from us," writes David, who had as much
reason as anyone to hope that God had healed his memories (Ps.
103:12)1
Old Testament sinners were confident in the presence of God,
not because God had a selective memory or because he had
purposefully forgotten the sins of his people, but because in
"remembering" 	his own people he could not at the same time
remember their sins. With God, forgetting is not an action of his
will; only remembering is. "O Lord Goo, remember me, I pray,"
Samson cried out, even though he had been blinded through the
folly of his pride and disobedience. "He [God] has remembered
his steadfast love and faithfulness to the house of Israel" (Ps.
98:3).
God does not say "I will forget," but "I will remember." In
his remembering 	lie salvation 	and healing. 	In being 	remem-
bered by God we are at the center of his vision and occupy the
totality of his affection. Those whom God remembers fill his
vision as objects of his desire and love. They are seen by God as
whole. God has no imagination of evil, because he has no
intention of doing evil. God has no distorted image in his mind,
because he has no will to distort in his heart.
Thus prayer helps us to focus on God as the totality of our
lives, measured by his promises for our good. "Memories" in the
form of disconnected mental images are "flooded" out of the self
through the flow of this total goodness of God directed toward
us. Prayer is itself the work of memory directed toward promise.
We do not find it natural to pray in this way, however. Our
"imagination" 	is hooked to the 	disconnected 	thoughts 	and
experiences of the past and roams freely over the undirected and
fragmentary desires 	and sensations 	of the inner 	self. "The
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth," declared God

-- 148 of 257 --

148 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
following the judgment of the flood (Gen. 8:21). The power of
"imaging" in the human heart went awry, and as a result, people
have "exchanged 	the glory of the immortal God for images
resembling mortal man or birds or animals or reptiles" 	(Rom.
1:23).
From 	this 	perspective, 	the 	healing 	of memory 	is 	more
appropriate as a therapeutic goal than the healing of memories.
The difference may be largely semantical to many, but from a
Christian perspective memory relates to the positive core of self-
identity and thus to the essential reality of the self as having not
only a past, but a future. Because the determination of God is
the basis for self-identity, his promise of the future becomes the
orientation of memory. This, however, does not discount the
value of therapeutic procedures dealing with a person's "fro-
zen" emotional experiences, which continue to support neurotic
patterns of behavior.
Therapeutic 	gain achieved through some kind of cathartic
experience under the supervision of a therapist can be quite
necessary, and yet quite insufficient to achieve the growth goal
of the 	"healing 	of memory." 	The 	healing 	praxis of prayer
supports therapeutic gain achieved through therapeutic proce-
dures, but it continues to release emotive power to grow and
develop as memory itself is liberated from a "thought pattern"
that deflects it back upon the self. When the "memory" -to 	the
Hebrews the core of the mind itself-is 	"filled" with God's love
and promises, then a healing praxis takes place beyond thera-
peutic gain.
Two implications 	of what we 	have 	been 	saying for the
therapeutic process can now be underscored. First, there is the
implied 	theory that emotions 	result 	from perceptions, 	with
behavior issuing from the emotion as a "purpose of the heart."
Emotions, therefore, are not "free-floating" or "autonomous"
components of the self that drive behavior; rather, they are
systemically related 	to the 	mental 	processes 	of perception,
intending, and acting. The Scottish philosopher John Macmur-
ray says that emotions are basically rational in that they can be
directed toward the objective reality of other persons. Emotions
become irrational when they are broken off from our actions
with other persons. Even the emotions and feelings that are
most closely related to my self are given objective and rational
status when integrated into my shared life with others. 16

-- 149 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	149
Ordinarily, we are concerned with the emotional health of a
person because of the kind of behavior that constitutes the
presenting problem. But in dealing with emotional disturbances
we must also take into account the relation of emotions to
perception and will. At this point we might want to take another
look at the Rational-Emotive Theory as advocated by Albert
Ellis. Despite his contention that religion is a source of mental
confusion rather than mental health, it may well be that some
aspects of RET are quite congenial with a biblical anthropology
and a Christian approach to therapy.11
A second implication for the therapeutic process is the theory
that memory is not a function of the mind, but is the mind. For
the Israelites, to remember, to imagine, and to think are all part
of the same mental process by which the self is directed toward
action. The result is "wisdom," the property of the soul, or a
skill in shaping the very thought that leads to the right result.
John Pedersen insightfully comments, "Wisdom is essential in
the making of a soul. If a man lacks wisdom, then he has no
heart .... 	Wisdom is the faculty of the whole of the soul, just as
the will is the direction of the whole of the soul." Pedersen
relates this to the psychological process:
All mental activity points in the direction of action. But what is the
place that action occupies in the psychological process? According
to European psychology action first originates in the region of
ideas; then it is penetrated by feeling, which in its tum makes it to
be determined by volition; this again leads to resolution, which is
followed by action. Thus the activity of the soul is completed; the
result of the action lies entirely outside its sphere, being added as
a new element.ts
For the Israelites it was quite different, says Pedersen. The
soul perceives the result of the action as a good, so that the
intention rises in the heart to produce the action. We do not
contemplate action in itself as a mental state, but we "imagine,"
"call to mind," or "remember" the result of an action.
The healing praxis of prayer works in just this way. When
prayer focuses on the concrete results of God's actions in our
lives, we actually become whole by contemplating this whole-
ness. Expressing in words the results of God's love and grace,
prayer names the reality that belongs to the healed self, rather
than merely describing the pain and lamenting the loss.

-- 150 of 257 --

150 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
When Jeremiah laments his affliction and complains, "My
soul continually thinks of it and is bowed down within me," he
immediately "remembers" 	the faithfulness of Yahweh.
But this I call to mind,
and therefore I have hope:
The steadfast love of the LoRDnever ceases,
his mercies never come to an end;
they are new every morning;
great is thy faithfulness .
..The LoRDis my portion," says my soul,
..therefore I will hope in him" (Lam. 3:21-24).
The healing for Jeremiah did not come about through an attempt
to replace 	the 	negative 	images (memories) with 	new 	and
positive images, but through his "remembering" the good that
Yahweh had done and that he had promised to do for him.
Jeremiah recovers the "memory of wholeness," which is itself a
mental process through which his emotions and actions can be
reoriented to a good and productive life. Thus he achieves the
"wisdom" characteristic of the righteous and blessed man.
I have 	suggested 	that there 	are two implications 	of our
understanding of the mental process from the perspective of an
Old Testament anthropology. First, perceptions cause emotions
to arise within the self that lead directly to appropriate action in
order that what is perceived (imagined) may be accomplished.
Second, "memory images" are not one function of the mind, but
"memory is the mind."
How do these two implications inform a Christian therapist
who seeks to heal persons through the praxis of prayer? Let me
suggest several specific ways that come to mind.
1. We should focus on results of actions rather than actions
themselves. The Israelites did not really think about the actions
of God, but rather about the results of those actions. Joseph did
not think about the actions of his brothers, who sold him into
slavery, but contemplated 	the result of the actions as good
despite 	their 	intentions. 	"You sold me. . . . you meant evil
against me; but God meant it for good" (Gen. 45:5; 50:20).
Jesus 	told 	his disciples 	that 	to hate 	is already to have
committed murder, and to lust is already to have committed
adultery (Matt. 5:28; 1 John 3:15). When we perceive desires

-- 151 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	151
and emotions in terms of the results of actions, we perceive
things quite differently. I once asked a person who hated his
mother how he planned to dispose of her body. Shocked, he
protested that he did not want her dead, but neither did he think
she actually suffered from his feeling of hatred. I think that he
ended up not liking her very much, but was content to leave her
alive while he got on with his life.
To pray in a case like this demands forming positive, concrete
intentions toward the one who has caused pain. Praying does
not take our pain away, but it frees us from the captivity of
painful memories and emotions. To this end Jesus told us to
"pray for our enemies." To be sure, praying won't necessarily
make us feel affectionate toward our enemies, 	nor vvill we
necessarily come to regard them as friends. But in praying for
our enemies we release ourselves from the captivity of our own
emotions and free our emotions to be directed toward God. For
we do not pray to our enemies, but to God on their behalf.
2. We should focus on the benefits of God's actions through
Jesus Christ, not on concepts of God. When the apostle Paul was
caught in the undertow of his ambivalence, nourished by his
own self-condemnation, he experienced a healing of his memory
by contemplating the "law of God" and then acknowledging his
love for it, out of the depths of his own being (Rom. 7:22). In the
Old Testament, Israelites would praise Yahweh, but they would
love and meditate on his law (cf. Pss. 19:7-14; 119). Consider
the vivid images of Psalm 23, where David remembers the Lord
as a shepherd, with green pastures, still water, an overftowing
cup, and a banquet table, all consummated by a life lived in the
house of the Lord forever!
When we focus on the benefits of God's actions, historical
memory joins 	with 	eschatological 	memory to heal 	present
memory. The Israelites comprehended past benefits of God and
future benefits in the same act of thinking, or remembering.
Healing memory means much more than relearning or forgetting
bad memories. Memory is healed 	when it "remembers 	the
goodness of God" in upholding one's present and future life.
When memory heals, emotions arise within the self that become
intended actions, which include the blessings and good antici-
pated. Thus modification of behavior results when we image the
results of behavior as a benefit or blessing on our lives.

-- 152 of 257 --

152 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Worshiping and praising God for his benefits give the mind
"rest" 	from attempting 	to integrate 	fragments of good into a
whole. The good is one thing and is willed by God. Prayer is
"willing the good" as directed 	toward us by God.
We should not doubt the therapeutic and practical wisdom of
"meditating" on God's Word and God's benefits. "Blessed is the
man who walks not in the counsel [precepts] of the wicked,"
says the psalmist, "but his delight is in the law of the LORD, and
on his law he meditates day and night" (Ps. 1:1-2; cf. 119:15,
78, 97; 143:5). When the psalmist says, "I have laid up thy word
in my heart, that I might not sin against thee," he is not speaking
of rote memorization, but of receiving the Word into his heart as
the story of God's actions and the promise of his benefits (Ps.
119:11). There is every reason to think that such an exercise as
part of the therapeutic 	process 	would 	have 	similar healing
power today.
Here 	prayer 	and 	the 	use 	of Scripture 	can be 	helpfully
combined. When we fill our minds with Scriptures that speak of
God's goodness and blessings, 	prayer becomes 	the praxis of
healing. Thus a helpful "homework" 	assignment for a patient
would be to write out prayers after meditating 	on Scripture.
3. A Christian therapist can act in the role of a prophet as
well as a priest. The therapist as a priest can not only become
the 	advocate 	of the 	client 	through 	listening, 	affirming, and
interpreting, 	but also serve as the advocate of the benefits of
God. In this prophetic 	role the therapist 	may challenge 	the
memory of the client when that memory has become selective
and partial. He or she may even debate the client's perspective
on life by looking at both the past and anticipated 	results of
God's actions.
After listening sympathetically for an hour to a man's litany of
self-condemnation 	and self-accusation, I suggested 	that if all
that he said was true, then God had failed miserably in what he
set out to accomplish. Could God's intention to forgive and grant
complete healing as the consequence of the prayer of confession
be such a failure? Which was true, his own self-condemnation
based on what he felt, or the promise of God that stood contrary
to his own feelings? I then read for him 1 John 3:19: "By this
we shall know that we are of the truth, and reassure our hearts
before him whenever our hearts condemn us; for God is greater

-- 153 of 257 --

THE HEALING PRAXIS OF PRAYER 	153
than our hearts, and he knows everything." I sent the man home
to think about that for a week and to return with a written prayer
in which he responded to the Scripture passage.
The 	prayer 	was labored 	and 	written 	without much 	real
conviction. The client found it difficult to respond with a prayer
when he had practiced 	so faithfully a response 	to his own
feelings. But when he read the prayer out loud, he crossed a
threshold. Looking back, I see that the growth process took
place when 	God himself encountered 	him in the event of
prayer. He was now ready to work more constructively on the
process of clarifying and integrating his emotions. At the end of
the counseling relationship, when we agreed that sufficient gain
had been reached, he no longer needed a clinical supervisor. He
had learned how to pray. We who seek to heal someone's private
pain may well ask, along with Jesus' disciples, "Lord, teach us
to pray."
Summary
These, 	then, 	are the 	spiritual 	dynamics that inspire 	and
empower the therapy process:
• 	Through prayer that becomes a praxis of shared life with
God, there is a resource for healing and a new historical life
of faith;
• 	Through 	the 	use 	of Scripture 	that provides 	a creative
discovery of God's truth, there is empowerment for change
and a new freedom in the life of faith;
• 	Through the grace of God that touches the deepest core of
the self with empowerment 	for growth, there is a new
resource 	for the 	integration 	of personal 	and 	spiritual
identity with gracious ego strength;
• Through the dynamic of the kingdom of God, the totality of
the self as physical, social, and spiritual is grasped and
upheld in its orientation toward a positive life on earth and
a completed life eternally with God.
These are resources for integration and growth that attend the
calling and ministry of Christians who counsel. In part 3 the
person and role of the counselor will be defined more clearly as
one who is a vital agent and mediator in the therapeutic process
related to the life continuum of growth.

-- 154 of 257 --

154 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
We began this book with the nature of the human person as
the foundation for counseling, and we conclude the book with
an emphasis on the person and role of the counselor.
Notes
1. Donald G. Bloesch, The Struggle of Prayer (Colorado Springs:
Helmers and Howard, 1988), 63.
2. Ibid., 50.
3. Jacques Ellul, Prayer and the Modern Man (New York: Seabury,
1979), 60.
4. Ibid., 82.
5. Thomas F. Torrance, God and Rationality (Oxford University
Press, 1971), 41.
6. Ellul, Prayer and the Modern Man, 81.
7. Ibid., 85-86.
8. Ibid., 71.
9. Ibid., 175- 76.
10. Ibid., 177.
11. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Ethics (New York: Macmillan, 1955), 141.
12. John and Paula Sandford, The Transformation of the Inner Man
(South Plainfield, N.J.: Bridge Publishing, 1982).
13. Ibid., 11, 17.
14. Ibid., 20.
15. John Pedersen, Israel: Its Life and Culture, vol. 1 (London:
Oxford University Press, 1973), 107.
16. John Macmurray, Reason and Emotion (London: Faber and
Faber, 1935).
17. The implications for Rational-Emotive Therapy with regard to
pastoral counseling have been developed in a dissertation written by
the Rev. Dr. Jeffrey M. Dire, Rational-Emotive Therapy: Implications
for Pastoral Counseling (D.Min. diss., Fuller Theological Seminary,
1984).
18. Pedersen, Israel: Its Life and Culture, 1:127.

-- 155 of 257 --

PART THREE
COUNSELING 	IN A
CHRISTIAN 	MODE

-- 156 of 257 --

-

-- 157 of 257 --

8
Counseling 	as a
Christian Calling
My father lived and died as a farmer in South Dakota and, to
my knowledge, strayed no more than a hundred miles or so from
his birthplace. He was strongly attached to the soil from which
he came and in which he was finally laid to rest.
He did not talk about farming as a calling in life. He simply
made no distinction between what he did for a living and his life
as a person.
As a small boy I often brought lunch out to my father in the
field. One time I was sitting next to him on the soft black earth
that his horse-drawn plow had just turned over, when suddenly
he turned to me and asked me to stick my hand down into the
soil. "Son," he said, "this soil is part of your life-you 	take care
of it and it will take care of you."
Only in later years did I realize how powerful and formative
that action was. At first I thought it meant an attachment to the
soil, mistakenly thinking that he himself was bound to the earth
in some kind of fatalistic way. After serving in the army air force
during the Second World War, and after completing college with
a degree in agricultural science, I myself took up the life of
farming. For seven years I pursued that vocation, tracing out my
own destiny in the good earth.
How do we account for the shift of passion from one objective
to another? How do we explain the inner certainty with which
we change direction without doubting the correctness of the first
and without questioning the rightness of the next?
Did 	I 	unknowingly 	stumble 	into 	some kind 	of "agogic
157

-- 158 of 257 --

158 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
moment" (chap. 3) in which I grasped for more than the soil
could offer and so reach out for some personal goal and life
fulfillment beyond the world that ended with the last row of
com?
I experienced my conversion over a period of some time, I
remember. From a background of nominal Christian faith with
occasional church attendance, 	I moved intentionally and pas-
sionately into a personally expressed faith in Christ marked by
renewed 	life in the church and its ministry.
Triggering this conversion was an encounter with a fellow
farmer, a young man who had a vital Christian faith and with
whom I developed a friendship. His sense of immediacy with
God and his directness 	and freedom of expressing his faith
attracted me. When we discussed questions and issues related to
life, our work, and Christian 	faith, my own responses 	were
vague and noncommittal.
On one occasion my friend put the question directly to me.
"Ray, are you saying that you are really a believer 	and not
merely an observer?" My answer was yes, and we shook hands
as though we had closed some real estate transaction. That, I
believe, 	was my own entrance 	into an agogic, or growth,
situation, which released in me a faith in God that not only
integrated my life in a spiritual sense, but later led me, with my
family, to leave the farm and pursue theological training and
pastoral ministry.
In this chapter we want to look more closely at the concept of
a calling of God. First we will discuss counseling as a Christian
calling, then we will analyze the motives and intentions of the
Christian counselor who seeks to understand this profession as a
calling of God. Finally we will examine what it means to be
"occupied" 	with this calling and what distinctives a Christian
who 	counsels 	can 	experience 	and 	add 	to 	the 	therapeutic
practice.
Counseling as a Christian Calling
After my agogic situation, people talked to me about a "call of
God" in my life. I must confess that I did not experience it as
some kind of divine voice or mandate that came suddenly out of
thin air. Looking back, I can now recognize several factors that
led to this radical change in my life.

-- 159 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIAN CALLING 	159
Certainly the encounter with my friend was a transformative
and authentic growth moment, for it released a motive power in
me to profess personal faith in God. This friend's role in my life
fulfilled all that we have discussed 	in chapter 3 about the
agogical moment. He met me in what Jacob Firet called "equi-
human" address, using his shared humanity as a basis for a
trusting and meaningful relation between us. My friend was, in
fact, an intermediary 	who did not assert the prerogative as
mentor or the power as authority over me.
The relation summoned out of me some kind of counterpart to
my friend's own person. This would not have happened if he
had not himself been a believing person with an integrated life
and faith. It was the vital, engaging, directly personal, and fully
human presence 	that he brought into the relationship 	that
invited me to meet him at the same level.
But it was also more than that. The experience of a new circle
of Christian fellowship and support, coupled with the experi-
ence of teaching high school-age young people in the local
church, continued this growth process. Over the period of a year
or more there were released in me a motive and a desire to
invest my life in the lives of others. I saw change and growth
take place in the lives of others with whom I had significant
relationships. I was initiating growth encounters with others and
thereby enlarging and sustaining growth and change for me.
·In making the decision to leave the farm and to sever the
connection that my life had with the soil, I fully expected to
suffer, not regret, but a kind of melancholy. It would be, I
thought, a kind of death that would leave part of me unattached.
In a sense, I felt that I was leaving my father as well as the soil
behind. It was a pleasant shock to discover, even after only a few
months, that 	my new 	"calling" 	to study for the 	Christian
ministry had not left an empty space, nor did I long for what had
been or what might have been. My career change was not, I
think, a kind of denial, but rather a quiet and deeply rooted
transplanting of my life from one soil to another.
My father had not attached my hand to the soil on that day
long ago, although that was how I had interpreted it. Rather, he
had attached my heart to my hand. My inner self had become
bound to my outer life, so that whatever task I put my hand to
was done with a sense of finality and completeness that brought

-- 160 of 257 --

160 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
joy, rather than a feeling of fatalism, which spelled melancholy
and despair.
These reflections on my experience and sense of calling as a
Christian counselor are not meant to suggest a pathway to
follow, but an approach to the concept of a calling of God "from
below," so to speak. In the first three chapters of this book I
outlined an approach to counseling that began with the structure
of personhood as a guide to therapeutic growth and the role of
the counselor as growth partner. We can now look more closely
at how a Christian would fulfill his or her calling in the role of a
counselor. In this chapter we will focus on the special relation
between the practice of counseling and God's calling in life.
Every Christian is called into relationship with Christ, and each
Christian's life constitutes a fulfillment of that calling. My thesis
is that for Christians who counsel, counseling can be a means of
fulfilling that divine calling.
How Do I Know My Calling?
When one's inner life becomes attached to one's outer life, it
is the beginning of a concept of a calling of God. God does not
simply issue a call that interrupts 	and intercepts 	life from
without. Instead he enters into the sphere of life and encounters
us in such a way that we are summoned to respond to him in
"like kind." That is, he gives himself without regard to reward
or "payoff' 	in order to make the giving valuable. God values
love and self-giving. It would be naive and unhelpful to think of
God's calling coming to us "out of the blue." Some do speak of
having a dramatic sense of God's intervention, 	which they
interpret 	as a unique 	"calling" to some task. These 	special
interventions, however, can also be authentic forms of discover-
ing one's own calling.
As a rule, the calling of God should not be sought only in the
dramatic and extraordinary. Nor should it be associated with
some kind of "identity crisis" or used to solve a lack of identity
and purpose in life. The people whom Jesus "called" to be
disciples already seemed to have a well-established 	personal
identity and purpose. Their "hearts were already attached to
their hands," as the metaphor I have used puts it.
Jesus did not feel ambivalent about his own identity when he
"found [himself] in human form" (Phil. 2:8). He did not need to
be rewarded or to gain something from his act of leaving eternal

-- 161 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIAN CALLING 	161
glory to become human. He gloried in being human as the
single task of his life and as the fulfillment of his divine sonship.
His calling as the Messiah grew out of his sense of personal
identity. He responded out of his own being to the God who
continued to say from heaven, "This is my beloved Son, with
whom I am well pleased" (Matt. 3:17). His response to the
needs of those around him awakened his power of love and his
instincts for righteousness and holiness.
I thought that the attachment of my hand to the soil deter-
mined my life; so I thought I depended on the soil to stimulate
my heart and fulfill my life. But this was not correct. Actually, in
further understanding the experience, I 	saw I had become
"unattached" to the soil when I "attached" my heart to my hand.
The soil and the task of farming the land were not an external
"stimulus" that produced a sense of purpose and meaning
within me as a "response." Otherwise, Christian calling could
have become only a kind of "fate" or duty to which I was bound
as a way of fulfilling my Christian life. The criterion for my
"effective calling" would then have been bound up with the
results or with my success in this calling. Maybe that is why
farmers tend to speak of "crop failures" rather than "farming
failures."
Once I saw that my heart had become attached to my hand, I
sensed that my calling would be fulfilled wherever I put my
hand. The soil became a metaphor, much like Jesus' use of the
phrase, "No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is
fit for the kingdom of God" (Luke 9:62). Jesus is speaking of the
attachment of the hand to the plow, not the plow to the soil. This
"singleness of heart" without ambivalence is the personal and
integrative context in which one perceives a calling of God.
What Is a Christian Calling?
Seeing the call of God in life as located in the congruence
between the inner and outer life helps us to understand what it
means to take up life as a "Christian calling." This can also be a
healthy corrective to concepts of Christian calling that tend to
make us dependent on results for confirmation of the call or,
even more serious and devastating, tend to shift the sense of
calling from one's inner motivation to the demands of the
"ministry" of one's life.
This is particularly an occupational hazard for parish minis-

-- 162 of 257 --

162 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
ters, though I suspect that it also can become a problem for
Christian counselors and therapists. 	Some enter the profession
of ministry because 	of a "call of God." The form of this call
becomes identified with a particular "vocation," or calling, such
as being a pastor of a church. The call of God is understood to
have a priority over all of life, even over family and friends, and
especially over the maintenance and fulfilling of the self. "God
first, others 	second, and myself last" goes the Bible school
warning to those who go into "full-time Christian 	service."
It would be hard to exaggerate the psychological, spiritual,
and even physical devastation that this misunderstanding 	has
caused many Christians who sincerely attempt to live out this
"calling of God." First they assume that God "assigns" a person
to a task, promising a reward to the faithful servant at the end.
This task then becomes a "calling" 	when the demands of the
ministry itself in terms of insatiable 	human needs take over.
Now the calling itself in terms of the duty to serve others
replaces God as the source of the call. At the same time, their
identity so merges with the task that a "personage" replaces the
"person," 	to use 	Paul Toumier's 	words. And because 	they
expect a reward to compensate 	for the sacrifice, they concoct
rewards out of success at any cost. Or, failing that or because of
that, 	they 	are finally driven 	to reward 	themselves 	through
surreptitious 	sensuality 	or some other delicious 	deviation.1
A calling 	becomes 	Christian 	when 	our 	life 	with 	Christ
becomes identical with our hand and heart. Or, to put it another
way, being Christian is a calling that is fulfilled in and through
that which becomes one's destiny here on earth. Our destiny is
related to that which consumes our life. Paul says, "I have been
crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live, but Christ who
lives in me; and the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in
the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me" (Gal.
2:20). The Christian calling does not lead us away from our life
and destiny here on this earth, but is a gracious calling to live
with the knowledge that our life is a fulfillment of "Christ in,,
us.
How Do I Fulfill My Calling?
Once a person is overly attached to the ministry situation, a
fatal "cause and effect," or "stimulus-response" 	mechanism can
develop. Theologically the concept of a calling by which one

-- 163 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIAN CALLING 	163
lives out life can be understood as a structure of freedom and
response, 	not stimulus-response. 	The freedom and response
relation can take place only within a relationship that is fully
personal. That is, only a personal being can encounter another
being in such a way that a response is elicited that is derived out
of freedom and not out of necessity.
"The love of Christ controls us," Paul says (2 Cor. 5:14). The
somewhat ambiguous genitive construction in the Greek leaves
open the possibility that it is both Christ's love for us as well as
our love for Christ that is the controlling, or compelling, force. A
sense of calling is centered 	in the perception 	of the self as
positively oriented toward others and God. Calling does not
arise out of a need that the other fulfills, or out of a need that the
other places on me as a demand.
If we continue to think of a sense of divine calling as a basis
for undertaking 	the profession of counseling 	as a Christian
therapist, we must not allow counseling itself to become the
calling. We are not "called 	to counsel," 	but 	called 	to be
Christian in our counseling. The calling remains a dynamic of
freedom and response in our relationship to God. Above all, this
calling is congruent with the growth and development of our
personal identity as a process. Being Christian is thus "being
called" to live one's life to the fullest, being open to change, and
experiencing God's presence and blessing in the place, time,
and work that occupy life.
The Motivation for a Christian Calling
We cannot examine the nature of calling as a perspective on
counseling as a Christian vocation without looking more closely
at the motivation underlying 	our sense of calling. We have
learned to our dismay that our motives are not always consistent
with our intentions. One source of ambivalence is surely due to
the 	unreliability 	of our 	motives 	as expressed 	through 	our
commitments.
Jacob 	Firet, 	discussing 	pastors, 	warns 	against 	confusing
motivation and motives. Motivation as a source for behavior is
not very clear, he says, citing Gordon Allport: "As for motivation
..• 	psychologists are in a state of turmoil and disagreement.'' 2
Firet 	also suggests that the 	concept 	of motivation is more
inclusive than what we usually have in mind when we speak of

-- 164 of 257 --

164 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
"personal motives." A person's motives may be considered as
the consciously held reasons for doing or not doing something.
Motivation, by contrast. is the driving force behind 	a given
behavior, a force that may at times be quite different from the
motives expressed by the person. 3 In this way of looking at the
issue, motives are the reasons we give to ourselves and others
for our decisions and actions, while motivation is a deeper drive
that may be hidden from us.
Candidates for pastoral ministry are usually asked to state
their reasons, or motives, for seeking to enter pastoral ministry.
The orthodox answer is some form of a testimony to a perceived
sense of God's calling. What may be far more significant are the
underlying motivations, which may, in fact. be hidden from a
candidate's conscious mind. When these underlying motivations
become evident. the character or quality of our actions may be
called into question. My expressed motive may be to serve
Christ through a form of professional pastoral ministry, and I
may have a strongly held sense of divine calling. As it turns out.
my actual motivation may be to find self-gratification in the
honor and prestige attached to the ministry. When this real
motivation becomes 	evident 	to others, 	they 	will view my
ministry as self-serving and unworthy 	of Christ. 	Paul was
charged 	with 	such unworthy 	motivation, and he 	defended
himself strongly to the Christians at Thessalonica, appealing to
their knowledge of his actions and intentions 	when he was
laboring among them (cf. 1 Thess. 2:1-16).
It is obvious that candidates for counseling as a Christian
ministry might run into the same problem with discerning their
own motives and motivation. From a psychological perspective,
motives and motivations are complex and, at best. only inferred
out of certain styles and patterns of behavior.
John Macmurray makes what I believe 	is a more helpful
distinction 	between 	motives and intentions. 	"Though 	every
action must have a motive," he writes, "it is not determined by
its motive. It is determined, 	as this specific action, by the
operation of intentions." 4 In each action of a personal agent. he
suggests, we must presuppose 	a "system of motives whose
differentiations refer to the Other. . . . The agent can accord-
ingly act either 	for or against the Other." 	In other words,
persons in relation always have motives that are differentiated
in terms of the others with whom one is in relation. These

-- 165 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIAN CALLING 	165
motives 	can be 	either 	positive 	or negative 	as viewed 	with
respect to the other, but in and of themselves simply as motives,
they do not determine 	the relation as personal. There must be
an 	underlying 	intention 	that 	is rooted 	in the 	structure 	of
personhood 	and the relation 	itself.s
For example, parents may have a complex system of motives
(motivations) that enters 	into the intentional 	act of parenting.
Likewise, 	children 	may respond 	out of a complex system that
entails motivations, fear, needs, rewards, and stimulus-response
dynamics, etc. But the intentionality 	that forms and sustains the
structure of the relation itself can be grounded in the act of love,
which is a deeper 	construct and dynamic in the relation than
motives and motivations. A parent may discipline a child when
the parent's 	motives 	are mixed 	and confused. 	The 	parent's
anger, frustration, and feelings of powerlessness 	may be inap-
propriately expressed as rage against a child when the parent's
intention 	is actually to discipline 	the child for its own good.
Where intentions 	have become imbedded 	in consistent acts of
love, 	security, 	and 	care 	between 	parent 	and 	child, 	these
destructive 	and inappropriate 	motives may be healed. 	Object
relations psychology would say that the parent must be "good
enough" 	and not perfect. 	Being "good enough" 	is sustaining
intentionality 	based on love with enough consistency that lapses
do not destroy the objective identity of the child as good and
loved. 6
This 	is not 	to say that 	motivations 	or motives 	are 	only
incidental 	to the 	dynamics 	of the 	relationship. 	Underlying
motivations 	may be so powerful as to render 	the relationship
virtually dysfunctional 	or even pathological 	despite 	the inten-
tionality of love. I point out the distinction to show that a sense
of calling 	may be 	grounded 	in something 	other 	than 	mere
psychological 	motivations.
This 	level 	of intentionality 	cannot 	be 	ascertained 	from a
strictly psychological approach. A projective type of psychologi-
cal test may uncover, by inference, underlying 	motivations that
aid in diagnostic evaluation. 	But the structure of intentionality
by which one acts out of a sense of duty or "calling" 	is more
related 	to the dynamics 	of growth we have described 	than a
psychological, 	stimulus-response 	dynamic. What makes inten-
tions different from motivations is that we can expect others to
state clearly their intentions and to be held accountable to them.

-- 166 of 257 --

166 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Unwillingness to state our intentions would be itself a sign of a
motivation that is less than open and honest. By saying that I am
a Christian who counsels, I am stating an intention to counsel in
a way that is Christian.
The love that moved Christ to "die for all'' (2 Cor. 5:15) is
what "constrained," 	or gripped, 	Paul. The apostle uses the
Greek word synechei to express this sense of being grasped by
the power of another's love and the source of one's own actions.
Jesus uses the same verb in Luke 12:50 to describe his own
"constraint" 	to complete 	his 	course 	of action by going to
Jerusalem even though it meant suffering and certain death.
This sense of "being 	constrained" 	suggests to us a better
concept than motivation for understanding 	the dynamics of a
sense of calling. Synechia, or constraint, does not arise from
within the person as a psychological or intrapersonal disposi-
tion. It is another power, the power of the One who has come
over him, that constrains 	Jesus. The 	"sense" 	of this inner
response 	to the compelling 	power of another's 	love can be
recognized through motives and motivations as an inference.
But more than that is not possible. 7 It is possible, however, to
counsel 	under 	the 	"constraint" 	of serving 	the 	other 	with
Christlike love and care.
We can be forgiven for failing to live up to this intention if
such failure is acknowledged. Failure to fulfill such intentions
does not constitute ambivalence when the failure is confessed
and shared. Ambivalence results from failure to state intentions
and, instead, to allow our calling to be driven by motivation
alone.
"Constraint" 	calls us to live as Christians and devote our-
selves to duty that unifies rather than divides the self. Duty is
freely choosing to devote ourselves to others under the con-
straint of serving Christ. We never merely devote ourselves to
duty, but to the "one who called me" and continues to uphold
me in love. "The man of duty," wrote Dietrich Bonhoeffer, "will
end up by having to fulfill his obligation even to the devil."&
On this basis there must be more than a sense of "duty"
directed toward ultimate love, toward God. This devotion is
single-minded and prepared to take up whatever duty "comes to
hand" to give it expression. Because love of God is bound up
with love of neighbor, and because all devotion (except what
God experiences within his triune relation) is mediated through

-- 167 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIAN CALLING 	167
duty, the other person becomes the middle term in the relation
of devotion to God. Knowing that our life and work satisfy God's
calling us to be Christians is a kind of wisdom that actually gives
us the strength to fulfill our calling.
This "wisdom" that comes from God and that God gives to all
generously and without reproach comes to those who receive it
in faith.
But let him ask in faith, with no doubting, for he who doubts is like
a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed by the wind. For that
person must not suppose that a double-minded [di-psychos] man,
unstable in all his ways, will receive anything from the Lord
Oames 1:6-8).
No finer exposition of this text has been done than that of S0ren
Kierkegaard in his classic work Purity of Heart is to Will One
Thing. The double-minded 	person, 	says Kierkegaard, cannot
will the good because that person cannot will one thing. We do
not will the good for the sake of reward or to avoid punishment
or even that the good should triumph in our lives. If we did so,
Kierkegaard says, we would be "constrained" 	by the results of
our actions rather than by the good itself.9 Kierkegaard helps us
to see that we must overcome our inner ambivalence before we
can integrate the heart and the hand. Or we could say that the
way to overcome this ambivalence is to unite the heart and the
hand so that devotion attaches itself to duty to directing itself to
God, who is the Good, and the source of one's devotion. 10 We
must root out this inner ambivalence by pursuing the intention
back to its roots, exposing the double-mindedness 	that lurks
behind all ambivalence-or 	the "wish," as Kierkegaard puts it.11
We cannot 	help 	but 	remember 	the 	words of Jesus, 	who
encouraged his disciples not to lay up treasures here on earth,
but to lay up treasures in heaven, "for where your treasure is,
there will your heart be also" (Matt. 6:19-21). 	"Let not your
hearts be troubled; believe in God, believe also in me. Believe
me that I am in the Father and the Father in me; or else believe
me for the sake of the works themselves" 	Oohn 14:1, 11).
In encouraging his disciples thus, Jesus was reminding them
of his own single-mindedness. 	He pointed 	them to devotion,
and if they could not grasp that, to see his devotion 	in his
work-in 	that which became his duty. His heart was attached to
his hand, and his heart was one with the Father.

-- 168 of 257 --

168 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
This single-mindedness gives us freedom to live and act in
such a way that the calling of God becomes identical with the
action itself, rather than with the results of the action. There is
an inner freedom and certainty of life in action that liberates the
self from even the ethical constraints of"duty." 	For, as we have
said, duty itself can become demonic apart from its source in
devotion to God.
The sense of fulfilling one's life as a divine calling is not an
esoteric or mystical feeling. It is not limited to those who take
up the "full-time ministry" of serving as an ordained pastor or
missionary. This sense of calling is the single-mindedness with
which Christians can take up the task of counseling or psycho-
therapy with a kind of "non-attachment" to the results, where
devotion can be attached to duty, but duty not become the
master of devotion.
Several things have now become clear in our discussion of the
practice of counseling as a Christian calling:
• A sense of calling is related to the congruence between our
inner life and our outer life, where the "heart is attached to
the hand";
• 	God's specific calling is discovered through the vocation or
task that fulfills and satisfies our heart and occupies our
hand;
• 	Christian calling involves being under constraint to em-
body the love and reality of Christ through one's life and
work;
• 	We fulfill our calling through the devotion that binds love
for Christ to the task at hand, to make devotion our duty, in
freedom and grace;
• 	In stating openly our intention of fulfilling our Christian
calling through our ministry of counseling, we clarify our
motivations and expose them to correction and healing.
The Occupation of Christian Counseling
What does it mean that a Christian takes up counseling or
therapy as an "occupation"? Is there a distinctively Christian
style of counseling? I would answer yes, but not as a distinctive
model 	of therapy. 	Rather, the 	distinction 	lies 	in how we
approach the task as a Christian calling. Or, we could say, the

-- 169 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIAN CALLING 	169
distinctiveness is the quality of the experience that the Christi.an
brings to the task of healing the client.
This 	statement 	seems 	to claim that 	Christi.ans might 	do
"better therapy," or that Christi.an counselors have some kind of
therapeutic advantage. This is not my intention. The person and
presence 	of every counselor make a difference in the therapy
session. The counselor is not a neutral figure or a nonentity.
Many clients 	have more positive experiences 	with a female
therapist 	then 	a 	male 	therapist, 	or vice 	versa. 	From 	the
counselor's standpoint, I wish to speak of what this "style" or
distinction 	can mean. 	The 	counseling 	style will also have
implications for the client in therapy, though not necessarily in
"doing better therapy."
When we counsel 	with the sense of fulfilling a Christi.an
calling, we can be fully "occupied" 	with this task in a healthy
and whole sense. This is what provides the style and makes the
difference in counseling. With the assistance of four questions
taken from Kierkegaard's essay Purity of Heart is to Will One
Thing, I will explain this distinctive 	approach more fully.12
These questions will provide an outline for further reflection on
the occupation of Christi.an counseling.
1. What is your occupation in life? "Occupation" in this sense
means 	our 	calling, 	not 	our 	profession. 	We may choose 	a
profession to fulfill our occupation or calling. Every person has
an occupation, though not everyone has a profession. I aim here
to look at counseling as an occupation that a Christi.an chooses as
a means to fulfill his or her Christi.an calling. This can be done at
both the professional and nonprofessional levels. It can also be
done part-ti.me or full-ti.me. The question "what is your occupa-
tion?" goes right to the heart of the matter with respect to how
one's calling as a Christi.an is being fulfilled in the world.
There 	was a ti.me when 	farming 	was my profession. 	It
"occupied" 	me as a task in such a way that my heart and my
hand were attached without regard to the results. I felt no less
meaning in the task when the crops failed than when they were
bountiful. A failure brought consequences 	that had both tangi-
ble and intangible effects, but it did not rob the task of its sense
of fulfillment.
I changed 	my profession, but not my occupation, 	when I
became a student and later a pastor and now a teacher. To be

-- 170 of 257 --

170 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
sure, we 	ordinarily 	describe 	our occupation 	in terms 	of a
profession or task, and that is a perfectly reasonable way to do it
But as Christians 	we can have a profession 	that is also a
"preoccupation," in which heart and hand are joined. I suppose
all of us have times when we are not really happy with our
present 	task and wish for something more. But we must be
careful that the "wish" does not become a disease, as Kierke-
gaard reminds us. Nor should the task be attended with a sense
of duty only, for that, too, can become self-destructive and even
demonic, as Bonhoeffer reminds us.
The 	practice 	of counseling 	or psychotherapy 	can be the
occupation of a Christian, and it can be considered as a Christian
calling. But the question to one who is undertaking this as a
profession is what his or her experience is as a Christian in this
occupation. This leads to the second question.
2. In your occupation, what is your attitude of mind? Or, how
do you carry out your occupation? Kierkegaard follows up this
question by asking, "Have you made up your mind that your
occupation is your real calling so that you do not have to make
explanation hinge on the result, maintaining that it was not your
real calling if the results are not favorable, if your efforts do not
suceed?" 13
I 	often 	find that 	graduating 	students 	suffer considerable
anxiety about knowing the "right place" to begin. The risk of
failing or of not achieving one's own goals (wishes?) can be
paralyzing. Even more serious is the mental attitude with which
such a person often takes his first job. "It doesn't really suit me
and has no real future, but it is a beginning," he can be tempted
to think.
When this happens, there is ambivalence and double-min-
dedness 	from the very beginning. 	The person is not able to
devote himself or herself to the task because of a concern for
results. Often the person wonders whether 	the profession is
actually consistent with a Christian calling. The person may
wonder whether psychotherapy can be "willed as the Good," to
use Kierkegaard's phrase.
In this case there is a failure of integration at the very core of
the venture, and the person launches out with a bad conscience.
The person may give the excuse of having a problem with
determining 	God's will, as though if one could determine the

-- 171 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIAN CALLING 	171
job as "God's will," this would make up for inner uncertainty.
The will of God cannot be used as a criterion for the good in
such a way that our own intention, decision, and actions are set
aside. We find the will of God through our intending the good
through actions that in the end are willed by God as good.
I have discussed this concept elsewhere, but I need to repeat
here that God's will is the goal of a decision or action.I• The will
of God is really the "aim," which can be changed when the
target moves. The will of God is not identified absolutely with a
plan, a method, or even a vocation. These may change-and
must be changed on occasion so that the will of God continues to
be in view as the goal. To ask whether it is the will of God that I
be a therapist, teacher, or pastor is not really the right way to
phrase the question. I know it is God's will that what "occupies"
my life and energies 	aims at producing 	a good measured 	in
terms of God's love and desire for people, and for my own life
given in devotion to him. I cannot resolve inner ambivalence to
my task by resorting to a spiritual device that makes this God's
decision rather than mine.
Many people may be concerned about counseling means and
methods. Such people may compensate by looking for spiritual-
ly "valid" and "rewarding" 	results from counseling. They may
seek to convert the non-Christians 	they counsel, rationalizing
that the end justifies the means. This recalls our discussion
about intentions 	as the clarification of motivations. We should
always be capable of expressing our intentions 	openly at the
outset of counseling. Christians who counsel do not need results
to justify their calling to provide care.
This idea leads to the third question.
3. What means do you use to carry out your occupation? If the
means are less legitimate than the end, then again there will be
ambivalence 	and double-mindedness. 	From the standpoint 	of
willing the Good as one thing, Kierkegaard suggests that the
means and the end are the same thing. "There is only one end:
the genuine Good; and only one means: This, to be willing only
to use those means which genuinely are good-but 	the genuine
Good is precisely 	the end."1s
We may use the analogy of firing a rifle at a target. Reaching
the goal is like hitting the target, but using means is like taking
aim. In this case the aim is a more reliable indication of the

-- 172 of 257 --

172 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
marksman's 	goal than 	the 	spot that the bullet 	strikes. 	For
instance, the shot may have hit in the right place by accident!
The marksman may be blameless if the shell does not fire, but
no 	irregularities 	of the 	aim are 	permitted. 	On this 	point,
Kierkegaard comments, "Eternity is not curious and impatient
as to what the outcome in this world of time will be. It is just
because 	of this 	that 	the 	means 	are 	without 	exception 	as
important as the end."16
Therefore we must examine the distinctive style of a Christian
counselor according to the means, and not merely with regard to
the end. If a counselor holds a Christian view of the person, the
goal of therapy extends beyond the means of therapy. Therapy,
of course, has its own specific goals, for which certain tech-
niques or methods are appropriately used to produce therapeu-
tic gain. But even the goals achieved 	by therapy are really
means to the ultimate goal-the 	freedom of the self to love God
and one's neighbor as oneself.
To make the point more clearly, we can remind ourselves of
the growth process that should attend every genuine 	human
encounter. 	I am insincere 	if I pursue a relationship 	without
really making it my aim to enhance the other's life. If I have
merely used friendship or a counseling relation as a means to
manipulate the other to give me some advantage or to do what I
want done, I have violated the integrity of the relationship. My
motivation will undermine that integrity. It should be a stated
intention that this will not be the easel
Some therapeutic 	means may achieve certain results, thus
demonstrating the technical skill of the therapist, but these same
means may fail to help the client reach the goal of integrative
growth. That is, some goals achieved in therapy do not even aim
at the larger, growth goal of integrating self with others and God.
Here, too, the intentions of the counselor need to be expressed
quite clearly. In certain cases the long-range growth goals may
be identified but not made a specific outcome of the therapeutic
gain sought. 	I can openly 	express 	to a person 	who 	seeks
counseling that my intention is to provide orientation toward
these 	long-range 	growth goals, which 	may include 	specific
aspects 	of spiritual 	life and formation. This places 	specific
therapeutic outcomes on a trajectory of growth without making
therapy the means to this end.
At this point the question of means must be considered. For if

-- 173 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIANCALLING 	173
the means by which therapeutic aid is given do not relate at all
to the goal that lies beyond the specific therapeutic procedure,
the 	means 	become justified 	by results 	rather 	than 	by the
intention to provide growth toward these goals. Again, it may be
said, "The surgery was a success, but the patient died!" Yet, in
this concern for the experience of the client as a person who
seeks the Good, not merely good health, we are already moving
to the fourth question.
4. What is your attitude toward others? Do we actually love
our clients as ourselves and so fulfill the second great command-
ment? Kierkegaard focuses the question 	quite appropriately
when he asks, "Have you no special privilege, no special talent,
none of life's special favors ... 	vanity has led you to take, so that
you could console yourself by means of it, and that makes you
dare not tell the uninitiated the source of your consolation?" 17
Do we as counselors use therapy to conceal our own suffer-
ing? Do we console ourselves that we are not afflicted with such
pain and in need of such grace? "You help to set the simple
straight," 	says Kierkegaard, "but 	treacherously 	you have a
further consolation for yourself; your talent is so outstanding,
that it could never happen that when you awakened tomorrow
you were the stupidist person in all the land."1s
The object of Kierkegaard's ridicule and acute questioning
was often the 	parsons, 	who represented 	to him the 	most
scandalous of people 	because 	they lived in state-supported
security but still charged fees for performing religious rituals.
But Kierkegaard was also questioning himself, for he doubted
that he yet had the singleness of heart to will the one thing.
"Blessed are the poor in spirit," Jesus said (Matt. 5:3). Jesus
most likely was not referring to the poor or the chaste, but to
those who have no need of adding to the wealth of their own
spirit by cleverly exploiting the spirit of others.
Counseling and the practice of psychotherapy usually are a
means of making one's livelihood by facilitating the mental
health of others on a fee basis. Here, too, the means become
identical with the end. Our attitude toward other persons will
determine what our aim is and how that aim is incorporated into
the means.
There is something distinctive about counseling as a Christian
calling. But that distinctiveness is not to be found in the method

-- 174 of 257 --

174 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
or model of therapy. Rather, it is to be found in the aim of the
therapist and how that aim informs the means of therapy. A
therapist who is also a Christian aims at being as guileless in
spirit as he or she is competent in therapeutic technique. When
our occupation is being a Christian, counseling as either a
professional or nonprofessional will be as good a soil as any
other into which to thrust our hand, provided that it is attached
to the heart.
Notes
1. For a further discussion of this problem, see my essay "Clergy
Burnout as a Symptom of Theological Anemia," Theological Student's
Fellowship Bulletin (March 1984).
2. Gordon Allport, "Psychological Models for Guidance," 	in R. L.
Mosher, R. F. Carle, and C. D. Kehas, Guidance, 2lff: Cited in Jacob
Firet, Dynamics in Counseling (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 	1986), 240.
3. Ibid., 241.
4. John Macmurray, Persons in Relation (London: Faber and Faber,
1961), 110.
5. Ibid., 111-12.
6. The 	concept 	of "good-enough" 	was coined 	by Donald 	W.
Winnicott to describe 	the infant's relation to its environment 	(The
Maturational Processes and the Facilitating Environment [New York:
International 	Universities 	Press, 19651). Cameron Lee at the Fuller
Seminary Graduate School of Psychology has extended this concept in
his essay "The 	Good-Enough 	Family," Journal of Psychology and
Theology 13, no. 3 (1985): 182-89.
7. Firet, Dynamics in Pastoring, 242.
8. Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Ethics (New York: Macmillan, 1955), 67.
9. S9.1renKierkegaard, Purity of Heart is to Will One Thing (New
York: Harper & Row, 1956), 55-56.
10. I want the readers to be aware of the fact that this essay on willing
the good is written by Kierkegaard as an "edifying Discourse." 	This
prayer is found in the essay: "Father in Heaven! What is a man without
Theel What is all that he knows, vast accumulation though it be, but a
chipped fragment if he does not know Theel What is all his striving,
could it even encompass a world, but a half-finished work if he does not
know Thee: Thee the One, who art one thing and who art all! So may
Thou give to the intellect wisdom to comprehend that one thing; to the
heart, sincerity to receive this understanding; 	to the will, purity that
wills only one thing. In prosperity may Thou grant perseverance to will
one thing; 	amid 	distractions, 	collectedness 	to will one thing; 	in
suffering, patience 	to will one thing" (Purity of Heart, 31).

-- 175 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A CHRISTIANCALLING 	175
11. Kierkegaard describes the ambivalence of the self poetically and
profoundly: "There are wishes that die in being born; there are wishes
that are forgotten like our yesterdays; 	there 	are wishes that one
outgrows, and later can scarcely recall; there are wishes that one learns
to give up, and how good it was to have given them up; there are wishes
from which one dies away, which one hides away, just as a departed
one is hidden away in glorified memory. Those are the wishes to which
an active person is exposed. They may be more or less dangerous
diseases. Their cure may be accomplished by the extinction of the
individual wish.
"Yet there is also a wish that dies slowly, a wish that remains with the
real sufferer even in the pain of his loss, and that only dies when he
dies. For wishes concern particular objects, and a great number of
objects, but the wish applies essentially to the whole of life ....
"Oh, weary not your soul with that which is passing and with
momentary relief. Grieve not your spirit with forms of comfort which
this world affords. Do not in suicidal fashion murder the wish; but
rather win the highest by hope, by faith, by love-as 	the mightiest of all
are able to do: commit yourself to the Good!" (Purity of Heart is to Will
One Thing, 150-51).
12. Ibid., 179-219.
13. Ibid., 199.
14. See Ray S. Anderson, Minding God's Business (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1986), 87ff., 97ff.
15. Kierkegaard, Purity of Heart is to Will One Thing, 202.
16. Ibid., 203.
17. Ibid., 207.
18. Ibid.

-- 176 of 257 --

9
Counseling 	as
Christian Ministry
"Pastor Ken, do you remember Martha, the woman I told you
about who felt that she had received help in therapy from me that
she could not receive in reading the Bible and praying? Well, she
said something recently that really disturbed me. She said that she
considers me to be more of a pastor to her than her own minister.
I'm a psychologist, not a minister!"
"Sue," Ken Jones replied, "you are a Christian practicing therapy
as a professional psychologist. You have a ministry to people that
many pastors don't have, that of sharing Christ's own love and
healing power."
"But I don't want to confuse psychology with Christian ministry. I
have always thought of ministers as being ordained and on a
church staff. You are the minister, I am the psychologist. Let's
keep it straight!"
"I used to think that way myself," Ken replied, "but I think that we
are both doing ministry and giving pastoral care, though we each
have specialities. I would like to think that Christ ministers
through each of us, so we are both ministers in that sense."
"Sounds strange to me, Ken. I wish I had a better grasp of what you
are saying."
"God does not spend the major part of his time in church." The
anonymous person who said that also stated, "His first and last
acts are the creation and recapitulation of all things. Even in
carrying out his purpose of salvation he works not only through
his church but also through 	other agents." 1 I believe 	that
Christians who counsel can be some of those agents. This
176

-- 177 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	177
chapter 	is written 	for Sue and others like her who need 	a
theological and practical foundation for counseling as a form of
Christian ministry. If we regard Christ himself as indeed our
model, we must recognize that he spent most of his time in
forms of ministry that did not have religious certification!
All ministry is God's ministry. 2 Even Jesus did not come to
introduce his own ministry. His ministry was to do the will of
the Father and to live by every Word that proceeded out of the
mouth of God. It was God's ministry to create this world out of
the freedom of his own life and being. It was God's ministry to
endow human creatures with his own image and likeness and to
give them the freedom to be creative, 	to love, and to risk
themselves 	in loving relationship 	with each other.
It was God's ministry to come to humanity in its failure and
frustration and to bind himself in covenant faithfulness to that
human history of misery and majesty. He did not tum his back
on Adam and Eve when they broke off that relationship through
thoughtless and presumptuous actions of self-determination. He
did not leave them to their desperate attempts to make a way of
life out of the jarring contradictions of erotic and erratic love that
produced as much pain as pleasure, even though it did soothe
their desperate 	loneliness.
No, God continued in his freedom to write himself into their
history so that their 	fate was bound 	to his future-thereby
giving them a new future and a renewed hope in the present. It
was this ministry that Jesus took up as his own. He is himself the
"paraclete," 	the advocate and comforter, the one who brought
reconciliation 	"from below," 	so to speak.
Those who practice counseling and psychotherapy as a way of
fulfilling a Christian 	calling are performing 	the ministry 	of
Christ. In showing how this happens, we will look first of all at
Christ's ministry as the foundation for all ministry; this ministry
takes place through the members of his body, the church. We
will then discuss the ministry of counseling as "incamational"
ministry, wherein Christ's ministry continues to be a presence
and power through the human encounter 	between 	counselor
and counselee. 	Finally, the counselor will be shown to be a
"transactional 	minister," 	when the interactive and integrative
process of spiritual growth is experienced 	and in some cases
begun anew. The term "ministry" in this chapter will obviously

-- 178 of 257 --

178 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
be used in a nontechnical 	and yet profoundly Christian and
biblical way.
Christ's Ministry and Our Ministry
It was the ministry 	of Jesus 	as an agent of healing 	and
reconciliation that brought God "out of the temple., and put him
on the streets. It was the ministry of Jesus that put divine love
and grace on the side of those who were condemned by the law.
It was the ministry of Jesus that united the divine heart with the
human hand, that spilled the tears of divine compassion down
the cheeks of a man; it was the ministry of Jesus that took the
plight of the paralyzed and the brutality of deformity like a blow
to the solar plexus.
Prior to Jesus, the word comforter had a hollow ring; human
would-be paracletes, like Job's "comforters, .. meant well, but in
the end they preferred to side with divine perfection rather than
human degradation. Before Jesus came, the most skilled practi-
tioner of healing and the most eloquent preacher of divine grace
secretly felt that God had abandoned, 	if not punished, 	the
diseased, 	the deformed, 	and the demonic. 	Most people 	were
terrified of becoming too closely identified with the godforsak-
en.
But it was precisely this godforsakenness that Jesus took upon
his own life and lips. His cry on the cross was more than the
echo of the psalmist's lament-he 	actually had crossed to the
side of the godforsaken, and from that "godawful" point of no
return, he turned toward God as his Father, seeking the ministry
of the Father in raising him, even from Sheol and the terror of
that dark night of the soul (cf. Ps. 22; Matt. 27:46).
Jesus is the first paraclete (counselor), the one who invested
his own person and life in the reconciliation of humanity. He
promised 	and 	sent another 	paraclete, 	the 	Holy Spirit, who
would continue his presence 	and ministry among them. This
other "counselor., 	(paraclete) "the world cannot receive, be-
cause it neither sees him nor knows him; you know him, for he
dwells with you, and will be in you. . . . I will not leave you
desolate; I will come to you., (John 14:17-18).
The Spirit gave continuity between Christ's ministry and that
of his followers, even as he testified to a continuity between his
ministry and that of the Father. "My Father is working still, and

-- 179 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	179
I am working" Gohn 5:17). In the same way that this work of the
Father was manifest in him, and yet in a way that was not
perceptible 	unless one had "his word" abiding in him Gohn
5:38), the Spirit would do his work in Jesus' followers who had
his Spirit abiding in them.
Through his baptism Jesus was incorporated into the ministry
of God, which led him to identify himself with those who were
in need 	of reconciliation. 	True, 	Christ's 	specific actions of
healing, casting out demons, and giving absolution from sin
gave the 	appearance 	of "ministries." 	Yet his 	total 	life of
identification with people, even to the point of death on a cross,
was the enactment of his ministry. This is an important point It
reminds us that behind forms of ministry, or "ministries," lies a
single ministry. This ministry is the power of divine 	love,
invested from below, in reconciling persons to themselves and
to God.
By this one Spirit, who is simultaneously the Spirit of God and
the Spirit of Jesus Christ as the experienced reality of Holy
Spirit, every Christian is "baptized into one body •.. 	and •••
made to drink of one Spirit" (1 Cor. 12:13). As each Christian
has this "calling," so too each Christian has this "ministry" by
virtue of being baptized into the one body of Christ
Paul has labored hard to make his point. Despite the varieties
of gifts, ministries, and "workings," it is the "same God who
inspires them all in every one" (1 Cor. 12:6). There can be no
mistaking his emphasis. Being Christian is being possessed by
the Spirit of Christ and incorporated into his body. But his body
is not an inert body. It is a functioning 	body, with many
members, each of whom has a share in this one ministry and
each of whom carries out this ministry both within the body and
in the world.
This "baptism" 	into the ministry of Christ corresponds in
some way to the water baptism of each Christian, so that one
might 	say, "Baptism 	is 	the 	ordination 	into 	the 	apostolic,
charismatic and sacrificial ministry of the church." 3 There is
another special ordination that belongs to the ministry of the
church. In this rite certain members of the church are set apart
for full-time ministry in the church. We are tempted to see this
as the only kind of ordination and the only kind of real ministry.
But this would be to disenfranchise the members of the body of

-- 180 of 257 --

180 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Christ from Christ's own ministry and link ministry solely with a
clerical office and role.
This kind of thinking led to the statement at the beginning of
this chapter- 	"God does not spend the major part of his time in
church." There are strong biblical and theological grounds for
arguing that every Christian has a calling to the ministry of
Christ by virtue of baptism. This ministry cannot be divided
between the "ministry of the laity" and the clerical ministry of
ordained persons. This distinction suggests that there are two
levels or two kinds of ministry. But there is only one ministry,
and that is the ministry of God embodied 	in the ministry of
Christ and continued through the members of his body.
Jesus did not attempt to develop a "lay ministry" alongside
that of the priestly ministry in the temple. While he supported
and did not repudiate 	the authentic 	priestly ministry as the
ministry of God, he himself offered this priestly ministry of
forgiveness, 	atonement, 	and 	reconciliation 	to God "on 	the
street," so to speak. Jesus did not spend the major part of his
time in the temple!
I have developed this general basis for a theology of ministry
to correct a common misconception of ministry as basically a
clerical or "churchly" function. This misconception has forced
an 	unwarranted 	distinction 	between 	lay ministry 	and 	the
ministry of the ordained clergy and has left those who invest
their Christian calling in nonclerical or nonchurch vocations
without a valid concept of ministry.
I myself was once asked why I left farming to enter the
"Christian ministry." And when I left the pastorate to teach in a
seminary, I was asked again what prompted me to "leave the
ministry"!
I understand quite well what lies behind these perceptions of
ministry, and I do not expect that what is said here will change
that perception to any great degree. But I want to stress that
those who take up the task of counseling or psychotherapy as
Christians may-dare 	I say mustP-think 	of this work as a
Christian ministry. I intend to show that the role of counselor
can be a ministry in which Christ works just as fully and
effectively as in a more clerical or ecclesiastical role. There will
be different aspects to that ministry, but it will be the same
ministry, because there is only one ministry, and that is the
ministry of Christ through his members. 4

-- 181 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	181
Christ's Ministry Through His Body-The 	Church
The literature on the nature and form of the church and its
ministry is so extensive that we cannot begin to cite or interact
with it within the scope of this chapter. We can safely say,
however, that the church is the expression of the form of Christ's
presence 	and work in the world.
Without disparaging ecclesiastical distinctions that exist be-
tween "churches," 	my purpose here is to define church in its
broadest and most concrete sense as the form that the body of
Christ 	takes in the 	world through 	its members 	under 	the
authority of and with the power of Christ. The church is the
extension of the power and the reality of the "gospel of Christ"
into the world. The church connects Scripture with the mission
of the Spirit of Christ in the world. The church by whatever
name or form must always self-critically assess whether it is
faithful to the gospel and whether 	it is reaching the world
through mission.
Because the church is people, not just an idea or concept, it
always has a geographical center. It exists on earth, not in the
air. And it exists somewhere before it does everywhere. It thus
has a kind of demographic and geographical specificity that
lends itself to the concept of being a parish, or parochial in its
form. The apostle Paul wrote not only to Christians in Rome, but
to the ..gathered Christians" -that 	is, the church-in 	Rome.
The parochial form of the church is a specific gathering of
Christians in a localized setting.
But this does not exhaust the biblical concept of the church as
the body of Christ. The church exists beyond 	its parochial
boundaries in the form of the ministry of its members in what
might be called "para-parochial" 	forms. In Paurs 	day local
churches sent out individuals to extend the work and ministry of
Christ in other areas and through other means. Paul himself
organized special relief efforts for the poor in Jerusalem by
creating an organization through which Christians could invest
their time, energies, and resources. This is the kind of thing I
have in mind in speaking of para-parochial kinds of ministry. 5
Let us be more specific. Christians may serve as counselors
and work full- or part-time on the staff of a local parish church as
either 	"ordained" 	pastors or "nonordained" 	counselors. The
status of being ordained or nonordained is a distinction that has

-- 182 of 257 --

182 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
to do with the role and ministry of being a pastor, in whatever
way that role is defined in the polity of a particular church. The
ministry of a counselor may include "pastoral care" offered as
specialized 	counsel 	and 	therapy, 	even 	though 	one 	is 	not
ordained to carry out other pastoral responsibilities 	within the
church. To my mind, this is a matter of local church polity and
does not constitute a division of the "one ministry" of Christ
into the two levels of ministry.
Some hold that anyone who counsels on the staff of a church
should also be trained and ordained as a pastor in order that the
counsel 	and 	therapy 	given 	can 	legitimately 	be 	considered
pastoral care. This tends, however, to suggest that pastoral care
is a form of ministry that can only be channeled 	through a
pastoral office. Arguably, however, 	it certainly would be an
advantage for a counselor to function in pastoral responsibilities
beyond that of counseling. What I question is the concept that
pastoral care as a ministry of Christ can only be given by one
ordained and set apart to a pastoral office. Pastoral care is first of
all Christ's ministry, and it is given to the church to be exercised
through its members. The Holy Spirit delivers paraclete minis-
tries outside of the office of the clergy, as well as through it!
Christians 	may also serve 	in a variety 	of other 	ways as
counselors 	and 	psychotherapists. 	Some 	Christians 	may 	be
professionally 	accredited 	and 	state 	licensed 	therapists 	and
counselors on a fee basis, working individually, in teams, or on
the staff of clinics and counseling centers.
In short, Christians who fulfill their Christian calling through
counseling beyond the structure of the local parish church are
still working as members of the church of Jesus Christ, but in
these cases in para-parochial settings. Where Christians organ-
ize a "Christian Counseling Center," 	a para-parochial form of
the church has come into existence alongside the parish, but not
outside of it. Such an organization, I believe, is not properly
called a "para-church" organization, but a para-parochial organi-
zation as part of the church that is the body of Christ.
Again, I want to stress that the ministry of Christ is fully
present in both the ecclesiastical form of the local, parish church
as well as in the ministry of its members outside the church
congregation. 	The 	specific problems 	this raises in terms 	of
accountability, 	connectedness, 	and ecclesial order in relating
the parochial and the para-parochial forms of the church need

-- 183 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	183
not concern us here. The New Testament clearly portrays both
forms of the church, but sets forth no organizational structures as
a model. The matter seems to have been left to the discernment
of and accountability to the Holy Spirit.
Counseling 	as a Christian 	ministry, 	however, 	does 	have
"limited liability." 6 Let me explain. The church in its parochial
form has an "unlimited liability" with regard to its members. By
"liability" I mean an implicit or explicit responsibility to attend
to the larger spectrum of a person's needs.
All members of the congregation can expect that the other
members will provide a presence and ministry of Christ along
the 	entire 	spectrum 	of life, from birth 	to death. 	When 	in
emergency situations they need food and lodging, they will look
to the church for help. When they need the ministry of Christ in
a time of tragedy, sickness, or death, they will look to the
brothers and sisters in their church community. Often members
of a church will be ministered to by those persons appointed to
specific forms of ministry, including pastoral staff.
In a para-parochial form of the ministry of Christ such as a
Christian counseling center, the team responds out of love and
concern for a fellow Christian and extends the resources of that
Christian community as far as possible with its own mission-
specific task. But the organization is more of a mission-specific
group than a community-specific group such as the parochial
form of the gathered congregation. The ministry of the parochial
organization will ordinarily be more of a Christian-to-Christian
extension 	of Christ's 	ministry, 	not a function 	of the 	entire
congregation itsel£ The assumption is that the Christian coun-
selor or client has a Christian community (parish) to which he or
she 	belongs. 	The 	para-parochial 	ministry 	then 	works in 	a
symbiotic relation with this community, rather than attempting
to replace it or duplicate 	it.
A Christian can expect that Christ will be fully present in the
counseling as a form of Christian ministry. But the Christian
counselor will have a "limited liability" with respect to provid-
ing the full spectrum 	of ministry expected 	of the parochial
church. Sue Johnson can provide a form of pastoral care through
her therapy as a Christian psychologist, but she can not become
Martha's pastor.
In the technical sense of the term, psychology is a clinical
skill that has a narrower focus than the total life situation of the

-- 184 of 257 --

184 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
client. This narrow focus does not exclude the total reality and
values that belong to the client as a person, but, like a surgeon's
narrow focus during an operation or medial procedure, it has a
"limitation 	of attention" 	during a therapeutic 	procedure 	that
focuses on specific therapeutic 	outcomes.
When this counseling or therapy is offered as a professional
service, it is usually considered a contractual service rendered
for a fee. A Christian psychologist or counselor who contracts his
or her services to clients for therapeutic purposes will ordinarily
specify the terms and expectations of the relationship from the
beginning. Some therapists may wish to extend the "liability" of
the contract beyond what is typical and include the realization
of goals that are rooted in personal and religious values. This
will often vary from client to client. The point is, the liability, or
contractual expectations, will be defined more narrowly than the
expectations associated with participation in the church in its
parish form. This should not, however, mean that the Christian
counselor is any less an extension of Christ's ministry through
the church than if these services were offered through a full
pastoral role on behalf of the congregation.
In the mission-specific ministry found in the para-parochial
form, ministry 	focuses more on the life and person 	of the
"agent" than does the parish church. This has special meaning
for the role of the Christian counselor, who can present in a
certain sense an "incamational" 	form of ministry.
In summarizing what we have said thus far about counseling
as a form of Christian ministry, we can say:
• 	Ministry is God's ministry to persons in the context of their
own life and need;
• 	Christ 	came to fulfill God's 	ministry 	through 	his own
ministry to persons, meeting them where they were and
binding them to his life and source of healing and hope in
God;
• 	Christ 	continues 	his 	ministry 	through 	each 	Christian,
whose calling to ministry can be expressed in forms related
to tasks and vocations in the everyday world;
• 	Christians 	who 	counsel 	can be 	agents 	of ministry 	by
representing 	Christ in the counseling relation.

-- 185 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	185
Counseling as lncamational 	Ministry
The Christian counselor, of course, is not another "incarna-
tion" of God! The incarnate One, Jesus Christ, continues 	to
dwell in the Christian through the life and power of the Holy
Spirit. This was the promise of Jesus Oohn 14:18-23) and the
teaching of the apostle Paul (1 Cor. 6:19; Col. 1:27). This is true
of all Christians, not merely some who are especially gifted.
Christians do not merely have a Christian perspective or hold
Christian beliefs and values; they are also present to others as
the reality of Christ himself, veiled, of course, in our personali-
ties and personages.
The counselor 	serves as an intermediary, 	not of ideas or
concepts, but of the reality of Christ, who creates a growth
process in which persons are given the motive power to respond
from the depth of their being. This "growth process" is what I
discussed as the "agogic moment" in chapter 3. The growth
process has three components: 	motive power for change, an
intermediary whose humanity is shared, and change and growth
in the client.
The incarnation, as a historical occurrence of God present in
the person of Jesus, has four stages, or levels, perceived in no
particular chronological sequence.
• 	There was a presence that was equated with the presence of
God himself;
• There was an encounter that brought the true knowledge of
God and opened 	up the lives of those encountered 	to
healing and hope;
• There 	was a confession, or affirmation, that Jesus 	was
himself the Lord God, with a resulting confirmation that
one had really received the gift of faith;
• There was a profession, a "vocation" of faith, by which
one's life acquired meaning and direction.
For our discussion we will consider these four stages of the
incarnation in pairs, with the first pair, presence and encounter,
directly related to the counselor-client relation. The second pair,
confession and profession, are less directly related, but nonethe-
less impinge on it.

-- 186 of 257 --

186 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Presence and Encounter
The first pair appear to be more implicit and indirect as far as
a concept or talk of God is concerned. The second pair seem to
be more explicit and direct with regard to one's expressed
relation to God. After the New Testament period. theological
reflection on the incarnate ministry of Christ led to truths and
concepts based on the incarnate life of God in Jesus of Nazareth.
But the reality of Jesus as personal being precedes and qualifies
the truths and concepts as well as qualifying the process of
conceptualizing 	as a way of proceeding 	toward truth. 	The
contemporaries of Jesus experienced his presence and encoun-
tered him directly well before they were able to conceptualize
or express their faith in him.
Therefore God's reality was as fully manifest through pres-
ence as it was through profession. That is to say, the incognito of
the incarnation, to use a concept of Kierkegaard. concealed the
full reality of God as a form of presence, but did not screen off
God from the relation. Because we think of Christian ministry as
verbally denouncing 	sin and announcing the good news, we
tend to discount the fact that an "unannounced" 	presence of
God is a "real presence." People encountered the presence of
God whether or not they recognized and acknowledged this fact.
Somehow, the "John the Baptizer model" seems more preva-
lent in evangelical Christian witness than the Jesus model.
Jesus went about largely incognito until people discovered, too
late, that they were in the same boat as the Lordi It is interesting
to note that, while many people got into the river with John to
be baptized, nobody got into a boat with him to go fishing! It is
also worth noting that when Jesus arrived on the scene as the
"announced" one, the ministry of John had reached its goal; "he
must increase, but I must decrease," John said of himself and
his ministry Oohn 3:30). Yet the church continues to be more
captivated by the ministry of denouncing and announcing as a
verbal witness to God than by the incognito of presence and
encounter.
This is to say that the "nonclerical" 	form of ministry as
Christian 	counseling 	may be the very "incognito" 	that the
incarnation seeks as a way of getting people "into the boat"
where the growth process can begin. The encounter can only
take place where there is a real presence of God in the situation,

-- 187 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	187
and the real presence must take place in the human encounter.
This 	is what is meant by the incarnational 	form of Christ's
ministry.
Kirk Farnsworth 	also 	speaks 	of incarnational 	integration,
which is the "embodied" 	experience of persons who actually
live out the concepts of wholeness defined by therapy. "Whole-
hearted 	integration," 	he says, is
incarnational. God's truth lives through us as we live as Jesus
lived. The application stage is the process of following Jesus by
living what we intellectually understand to be God's truths as his
framework for interpreting 	our experience and guidelines for
making responsible choices. 7
Farnsworth' s approach is somewhat different from mine. The
concept of embodying truth is closer to a concept of "actualiza-
tion" than it is incarnation. Jesus did not become incarnate by
embodying truths of an abstract or intellectual form. Rather, his
very being 	is the truth; he is the eternal 	Son of God who
"became human." Nor do I emphasize theological or Christian
"truths" 	of a purely 	intellectual 	nature 	that can be applied
through a therapeutic process that produces integration. Effec-
tive integration comes through the growth and development of
personal being itself as a somatic, psychical, and spiritual unity.
The counselor does not merely conceptualize or verbalize truths
that the client then "embodies" 	or "incarnates."
To a certain extent this can be an effective model, but by an
incarnational approach to counseling I mean more than this. I do
not deny that certain truths and concepts define the content of
the 	reality 	of God and 	Christian 	faith. 	But we 	must 	also
remember that, for God, truth is first of all concrete embodiment
of being expressed through act, and not an abstract concept or
proposition.
An incarnational ministry functions along the continuum of
presence, 	encounter, 	confession, and profession. A counselor
can be "Christian" in the therapeutic process at any one of the
levels. One sign, at least, that the process of therapy is a growth
process in which there is presence 	and encounter, 	if not yet
confession and profession, is that the client "escapes" 	more
rapidly the psychotherapeutic process, to use a concept of Viktor
Frankl.s
Through 	the 	presence 	and 	encountering 	of Jesus 	Christ

-- 188 of 257 --

188 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
through the Christian therapist, the client is moved to reach for
meanings and goals that lie beyond specific stages of emotional
or mental health. This is not a shortcut to mental or emotional
health by taking another route. Rather, it is a way of penetrating
through these symptoms and structures of disorder in order to
address the person himself or herself at a deeply personal and,
yes, spiritual level of being. This addressing of the person is the
encounter of self with self, being with being, rather than the
conceptual or abstract "telling" 	of something. This encounter
breaks through the caricature of the self created by emotional
and mental disturbances and brings the real "potential" of the
self into the dynamic of the encounter. This "potential" is the
reality of the self, not merely an abstract possibility.
We 	can 	see 	this 	reality 	as potential 	in 	virtually 	every
encounter that Jesus had with other persons, particularly when
his identity as the Son of God was as yet unrevealed. Many were
humanized and socialized almost immediately from conditions
that had relegated them to the margins of life. But his presence
and encounter forced others deeper into the "caricature" of their
real personhood, and they turned their spirituality into fanatical
and murderous hostility. No one could remain neutral.
Confession and Profession
Through the presence and encounter of Christ, some people
responded with confession and profession. Confessing him to be
the Messiah, the woman who encountered Jesus at the well in
Samaria professed 	that 	she 	had 	been 	transformed 	by this
encounter. Hearing her testimony, her fellow villagers went out
to see for themselves, and they too then followed her in making
this confession Gohn 4). This woman encountered 	the real
presence 	of God in Christ while he was still an anonymous
Jewish rabbi. In probing deeper into her life, beyond her own
rather superficial questions and comments, Jesus released in her
a motive power to grow and acknowledge him as the Messiah.
This was much more than an intellectual or rational apprehen-
sion of truth. 	She was transformed 	by this experience 	and
subsequently confessed to others her faith in the Messiah. This
is an example of what we discussed in chapter 3 as an "agogic
situation" where change and growth occurs.
My point is this: Christian counseling is a ministry of Jesus
Christ precisely because it can provide a growth process of

-- 189 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	189
presence and encounter with God as a context for the therapeu-
tic 	process. 	This 	does 	not 	violate 	the 	therapeutic 	process
through introducing conceptual or verbal forms of address that
purport to speak of God or even of religious values. It is a
"nonreligious" 	way of presenting 	ultimate truths of God and
religion, to follow Dietrich Bonhoeffer' s suggestion. 9
A trajectory 	of faith 	is established 	that 	moves toward 	a
recognition of Jesus Christ as the source of this presence and
power that leads the self toward wholeness and relation to God.
This "confession" may or may not occur in a given therapeutic
process. And the "profession," 	by which the client takes up
again or for the first time a life that is lived by faith and in faith,
may or may not become visible during the therapeutic process.
The 	Christian 	counselor 	serves as an intermediary 	for the
incarnational presence and encounter with Christ. This ministry
reflects Christ's "incognito" ministry, where he was in the same
boat and on the same level as those to whom he ministered.
Because confession and profession are linked to presence and
encounter by the reality of Christ in the situation, the counsel-
ing relation 	is the ministry of Christ even without 	explicit
confession and profession. This is one important aspect of the
incarnational 	aspect 	of Christian 	ministry 	that 	helps 	us to
understand 	how it occurs outside 	of and beyond 	the more
explicit and religious forms of confession and profession.
This is what Sue Johnson, the Christian psychologist, experi-
enced in her counseling relation with Martha, though she did
not have the theological concepts with which to understand and
express it. And this model permits a distinction to be made
between 	her ministry and the more ecclesial ministry of Ken
Jones, her pastor. Both are ministering 	on the continuum 	of
presence, 	encounter, 	confession, 	and 	profession, 	though 	at
different stages at different times. Sue Johnson should also now
understand that she has the freedom to move with Martha to the
stages of confession and profession in her practice as a Christian
psychologist, without becoming her "pastor." One hopes that
Martha's pastor also understands 	this and can begin to relate
more effectively as part of this growth process for her!
The Christian Counselor as Transactional Minister
With a nod toward Eric Berne, who offers a model of therapy
based on transactional analysis and who, I believe, once said,

-- 190 of 257 --

190 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
"Get well :first, we can talk about it later," I suggest that the
Christian counselor can be considered 	a kind of transactional
minister.Io
The 	perspective 	on counseling 	that 	I am attempting 	to
develop in this book approaches the self as an integrative and
growing 	person. 	This 	provides 	the 	basis 	for a therapeutic
approach that sees the self as open to encountering 	others.
These encounters in tum constitute the growth process (agogic
moment) 	whereby 	motive 	power 	for change 	and growth is
released. 	Here we need to distinguish 	more clearly between
specific therapeutic gains that properly belong to the counseling
situation, and the long-range growth goals that belong to the life
continuum and integrative task of the counselor.
If therapeutic intervention is intended to address both thera-
peutic gains related to specific and diagnosable 	problems as
well as growth goals, this needs to be made clear at the outset.
For 	some psychologists, 	therapeutic 	intervention 	might 	be
considered as a kind of personal encounter, 	such as the more
existential and humanistic psychologies might seek. This is the
kind of logotherapy advocated by Viktor Frankl, who urged his
clients to discover and express a "will to meaning" 	for their
lives.
But this already engages both the counselor and the counselee
in the life continuum as a context for therapy, as discussed in
chapter 2. When spiritual goals as well as psychotherapeutic
gains are sought, the client is being led into a psycho-spiritual
dimension of personhood. The purported scientific neutrality of
the therapist as a neutral factor in the process has given way to
direct 	involvement 	such 	that 	a form of "psycho-spiritual"
therapy is taking place, like it or not. I am not suggesting that
this is inappropriate, but that it be recognized and affirmed for
what it is. I wish to provide a model for Christian counselors so
that they may integrate therapeutic gains with growth goals in a
way that has integrity both therapeutically 	and as a form of
"transactional 	ministry."
Frankl himself argued that logotherapy 	did not attempt to
persuade 	a client to accept any particular value or religious
meaning for life, but he claimed that the "will to meaning" itself
was sufficient to give a client reason to "escape" the therapeutic
process. This enabled 	him to say that logotherapy worked as
well for nonreligious as for religious persons. The concept of

-- 191 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	191
absolute neutrality with respect to meaning as related to values
is debatable, however.
I suspect that this lies behind some of the current tension and
conflict within the professional ranks of therapists, with some
expressing concern that the more ..value-oriented .. therapeutic
models are going beyond strict psychotherapeutic procedures.
My own attempt has been to clearly differentiate therapeutic
gains from the spectrum of goals and values that relate to the
more existential and individual aspects of personhood. Both may
be intended as a context for therapy. But attempts to approach
personal and religious values through a therapeutic model alone
seem to me to be confusing to both psychology and religion. For
this 	same reason, 	I am not encouraged 	about attempts 	to
integrate psychology and theology along these lines.
The attempt to place therapeutic gain and personal growth
goals on a continuum of the psycho-spiritual dynamic of the
human self cannot precisely state where therapy leaves off and
personal 	and spiritual 	growth continues. 	I admit this. The
distinction 	between 	the 	two, however, 	is meaningful 	and
helpful as a construct that differentiates between therapy and
personal wholeness while at the same time viewing both as
essentially integrating in terms of the psycho-spiritual dynamics
of the self.
The intention of a Christian counselor can hardly he limited to
the narrower range of therapeutic gains, measured in terms of
functions, behavior, and adaptation to a world culture. The
culture of the kingdom of God, as we saw in chapter 4, intersects
the culture of any given situation and seeks to modify it to
include the dynamics of faith. By approaching therapy with a
deliberate Christian orientation, Christian counselors are prac-
ticing a Christian ministry as well as giving therapeutic aid. We
could deliberately 	separate counseling and therapeutic 	inter-
vention from our Christian life and practice. But this book is not
written in support of such a style. I am writing for those who
desire intentionally to relate their Christian faith to counseling.
Counseling 	as growth therapy, therefore, 	lends itself to a
transactional ministry in that an encounter takes place that both
mediates the reality of God's grace and provides psychic relief
and 	adjustment. 	This 	mediation 	of God's 	grace is not 	an
..infusion, .. as though there is a kind of ..sacramental .. convey-
ance of religious life. Rather, grace is always connected to God's

-- 192 of 257 --

192 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
presence, 	his presence 	is connected 	with encounter, 	and his
encounter 	is connected 	with action. The Christian counselor
serves as this "transactional minister" who fills the gap between
pastoral care and secular therapy. Helmut Thielicke suggests
the need for this in a very pointed way:
The nervous specialists to whom people are going in droves
instead of to their pastors must also be pastors. They must be
persons who are in solidarity with their patients regarding the
question of meaning. Otherwise this exodus to secular counseling
will have destructive effects.11
The implications of what Thielicke says are clear. If Christian
counselors fail to act as transactional ministers and separate the
therapeutic procedure from the encounter as a Christian, they
might be performing transactional analysis, but not transactional
ministry. Christian faith is always transactional, for a Christian
who counsels interacts with others as a "child of God." The
New Testament warns that failing to experience solidarity with
others in a transactional kind of faith and action is to void one's
faith (cf. James 2:14-17; 	1 John 3:11-18).
Jesus' ministry to the woman at the well in Samaria (John 4)
was transactional ministry in that, while she perceived _himas a
rabbi, he encountered 	her as the "Son of God" and Messiah.
Thus, by transactional ministry we mean a relationship in which
the Christian as "child of God" engages the other at this same
level. "Unless you tum and become like children," Jesus said,
"you will never enter the kingdom of heaven" 	(Matt. 18:3).
Jesus 	also used 	the 	metaphor 	of "rebirth" 	to indicate 	the
transformation that occurred when the Spirit of God touched the
human 	spirit Oohn 3:3). This transformation can take place
through presence and encounter even though it may not become
explicit until the stages of confession and profession emerge in a
person's 	life. The 	distinctive 	quality 	that 	a Christian 	who
counsels brings to the counseling relation is this transactional
reality of Christ's presence.
The implicit, indirect reality of presence and encounter points
to the transactional 	experience 	of confession and profession.
The growth process moves from encounter 	to confession or
profession in such a way that the Christian faith experience
becomes a shared one. Again, this does not necessarily need to
take 	place 	during 	the 	"therapeutic 	hour." 	But the 	growth

-- 193 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS CHRISTIAN MINISTRY 	193
process creates the environment for establishing this trajectory
of growth and faith in the process of therapy without violating
the therapeutic procedure. Indeed, there is no reason to suppose
that such an environment 	and transactional ministry will have
anything but a positive and reinforcing effect on the therapeutic
gains if it takes place in the solidarity and reciprocity of the
humanity of both the counselor and client
Therapy is not a "device" for evangelism, with therapy having
only an instrumental means and value. We have already seen in
the preceding 	chapter 	how this approach 	converts 	genuine
ministry 	into a desperate 	desire 	for "results." 	However, 	a
transactional ministry that takes the form of a genuine growth
encounter 	can effectively bring the reality of Christ into the
lives 	of both 	therapist 	and client. 	Here, 	too, the 	liturgical
functions of the church 	can be linked 	with the therapeutic
dynamics 	of the 	church 	through 	the 	ministry 	of Christian
counselors.
Those like Sue Johnson who serve as professional Christian
psychologists can become the bridge between 	the ministry of
Christ where incamational presence is practiced and the minis-
try 	of Christ 	where 	eucharistic 	and 	liturgical 	presence 	is
celebrated. 12 The "profession" 	of counseling is not exemption
from the practice of ministry. Nor do Christians who counsel
need to shun the label "professional" 	in order to fulfill their
Christian calling as ministers of Christ. But this professional role
makes many Christian counselors uneasy. In the next chapter
we explain why counselors 	can assume this role with good
conscience, as long as they intend to serve as Christ's minister
by extending healing and help to the child within each person.
Notes
1. "Christ's Ministry Through His Whole Church and Its Minis-
ters," Encounter 25, no. 1 (Winter 1964): 105; reprinted in Theological
Foundations for Ministry, ed. Ray S. Anderson (Grand Rapids: Eerd-
mans, 1979), 430-57. A contribution of the Department on the Laity to
the Section on "The Redemptive Work of Christ and the Ministry of His
Church," 	Fourth World Conference 	on Faith 	and Order held 	at
Montreal in July 1963.
2. I have developed 	this theme 	further 	in "A Theology 	for
Ministry," in Theological Foundations for Ministry, 6-21.
3. "Christ's Ministry Through His Whole Church," 434.

-- 194 of 257 --

194 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
4. One of the finest discussions of the concept of each member of
the church as a minister is found in the essay cited, "Christ's Ministry
Through His Whole Church and Its Ministers." C. K. Barrett has also
recently made this point through his analysis of the teaching of Paul in
the New Testament, Church, Ministry, and Sacraments in the New
Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1985), 3lff. A more recent book
by Greg Ogden, The New Reformation: Returning the Ministry to the
People of God, can also be highly recommended 	(Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1990).
5. For a further discussion of the nature of the parochial and para-
parochial forms of the church's ministry, see my book Minding God's
Business (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1986), !Off.
6. Ibid., 38-39, 	107, for a discussion of the concept of limited
liability.
7. Kirk Farnsworth, 	Wholehearted Integration 	(Grand Rapids:
Baker, 1985), 108.
8. The prevailing emphasis in Frankl' s development of "logothera-
py" was his attempt to move the client quickly through and past the
psychotherapeutic stage and to "reintroduce the psyche into psychol-
ogy." Psychotherapy has insufficient resources, he held, to deal with
the total of psychic reality. See Viktor Frankl, The Doctor and the Soul
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1955), 15-16.
9. See Dietrich 	Bonhoeffer, Letters 	and 	Papers from 	Prison,
enlarged ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1972), 328, 359.
10. Eric Berne, Transactional Analysis in Psychotherapy (New York:
Grove Press, 1961).
11. Helmut Thielicke, Being Human ... 	Becoming Human (Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1984), 447.
12. For a discussion of the role of liturgy in authenticating person-
hood, see my essay "A Liturgical Paradigm for Authentic Personhood,"
in Ray S. Anderson, On Being Human: Essays in Theological Anthro-
pology (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1982), 179-93. See also Frank G.
Dunn, Building Faith in Families: Using the Sacraments in Pastoral
Ministry (Wilton, Conn.: Morehouse-Barlow, 1986).

-- 195 of 257 --

10
Counseling 	as a
Professional 	Practice
The 	moment I stepped 	into his office the sweet odor of
omniscience sedated my brain. The pool of knowledge that I
had accumulated 	through almost a quarter-century 	of formal
education plus an equal span of measured competence in my
own professional shrank to insignificance.
It was nothing 	serious-no 	more than a routine 	physical
examination. But I was now in the presence of a man who had
mastered 	the intricacies 	of the human body, with technical
names for all its parts and functions, and had a wall covered with
diplomas to prove it. I had come to put the uniqueness of my
body, with all its personal quirks known, into his hands for an
hour or so. The intimate knowledge that I possessed would not
appear on the final report, I knew. He was the expert. Though it
was my body and my life, it was his knowledge and skill that
had the authority to pronounce me well or sick.
I was in the hands of a professional practitioner of the science
of medicine 	and surgery. He was the physician, 	I was the
patient. 	The 	few, almost 	incidental, 	clues 	to our common
humanity, such as the pictures of his wife and children on his
desk, were not there to create a bond between us. It was his
white jacket with the stethoscope casually draped around his
neck that sent stronger signals. My Ph.D. was invisible, my
family history only a source of interest for the sake of a medical
workup. Even the tools of my trade didn't count in this arena.
This was his turf, and he represented, in my mind at least, a kind
of "godlike" personage who lived in a world forbidden to us
195

-- 196 of 257 --

196 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
mortals. The fact that it was my mortality that kept him in
business and put food on his table didn't occur to me until I was
safely back in my office!
This feeling, I suspect, is not unknown to the reader. We live
in a society that reverences and fears the professional much as
ancient peoples reverenced and feared the priest. The motorcy-
cle officer who removes his leather gloves slowly without saying
a word, the pinstripe-suited 	banker who smiles and shakes his
head while glancing over the loan application, the robed judge
who looks down from his stand at those whose fate lies in his
hands-all 	these 	people 	and 	more remind 	us that we 	are
basically "ordinary people." 	And without these professionals
watching over us, our society would collapse like a straw house.
And let us not forget the professional 	therapist, 	ready to
welcome us into the inner sanctum of psychic healing where our
unruly feelings and irrational fears can be objectively examined
and calmly dispersed.
For all our talk about Christian counselors who see their task
as a Christian calling, for all our emphasis on counseling as a
ministry, the greater share of Christians presently preparing for
a counseling ministry have their eye on some form of profes-
sional practice. Many intend to serve on a pastoral staff or at
least as a counselor on staff of a parish church. Some of these
may also seek licensing by the state and enroll as members of a
professional society.
Most counseling graduates, however, will provide therapy as a
professional and/or clinical service under state license and as a
certified member of a professional society. This chapter will
focus on counseling as a professional service to aid practitioners
in integrating the questions of Christian principles and practices
with counseling. We will look first at the question of the role of
Christians 	as professional 	practitioners 	and then 	define 	the
professional more fully. We will also contrast the culture 	of
professionalism to the culture of the kingdom of God, giving us a
perspective 	from which 	to ask further 	questions 	about 	the
practice of Christian 	counselors. We will look closely at the
ethical 	question 	of professional 	practice 	in the 	context 	of
kingdom ethics, and finally we will offer some suggestions for
Christians who counsel as professionals.

-- 197 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	197
Can Christians Also Be Professionals?
Can a Christian serve without compromise as a professional
practitioner, offering therapeutic 	services on a fee basis, and
have accountability to a professional society as well as state
licensing standards? On the face of it, the question seems odd.
Little concern appears to be raised over the private practice of
physicians, attorneys, dentists, and other Christians who fulfill
their Christian calling in these fields. What is so different in the
case of a psychologist?
Alvin Dueck, director of pastoral counseling at the Mennonite
Brethren 	Seminary in Fresno, 	California, says flatly, "As a
member of the Christian community the individual healer is a
representative 	of its 	story. Therapy 	then 	is not a private
practice." 1 But he does not mean by this, as I take it, that no
Christian ought to be a professional practitioner. It is the word
private that receives his stress and criticism. He argues that
individual therapists, regardless of how or where they provide
therapeutic services to the public, function as an extension of
the Christian community and are accountable to it for the ethical
constraints 	on that practice. 	To his mind, 	the 	professional
society 	cannot 	be 	the 	primary 	ethical 	community 	for the
Christian therapist.
Granted, but why is this so different from any other Christian
who has a ..private practice"? Why is healing in the psychologi-
cal sector of life so different from healing in the physical sector?
I would suppose that the answer comes as a matter of degree.
Some might feel that psychologists work closer to the ethical
core of human life and thereby are under greater constraints to
uphold the culture of the kingdom of God. That is debatable, I
think. One could argue that the brokers of power in society-the
bankers, real estate agents, and holders of political office-
actually affect the social and ethical environment of life more
than psychologists do.
The Old Testament appears to hold officials in the economic
and political sector of society equally accountable to the ethic of
the kingdom of God with the priests and counselors. No, I doubt
that the case can be made that Christian counselors operate
closer to the ethical core of life. Nor, I would argue, do they
operate closer to the spiritual core. Spirituality is not lodged
primarily in the mental or psychical sector of life. For the

-- 198 of 257 --

198 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
kingdom of God, spirituality is the love of God and neighbor and
is invested in the physical and social well-being of persons as
much as in the emotional and mental.
If there is a danger in "professionalizing" 	therapy from a
Christian perspective, the risk is no greater than the profession-
alizing of any other sector of life in a way that dehumanizes and
devalues 	the 	individual. 	There 	are differences, 	of course,
between the effects of malpractice in dealing with human need.
A careless surgical procedure that leaves a patient blinded in
one eye is a painful loss, but the person can work around that
disability and continue to live a rather full and meaningful life.
An inept therapeutic procedure that leaves a client deep in a
psychosis, destroying his delicate emotional network of personal
relationships, is quite another kind of loss. And the devastation
and loss resulting from spiritual seduction by a professional
"minister of God" is incalculable.
"Let not many of you become teachers," James warns, "for
you know that we who teach shall be judged 	with greater
strictness. For we all make many mistakes" Oames 3:1-2). This
warning specifically addresses those who have the power and
means to influence or even manipulate the development of the
self in its mental, emotional, and personal life.
When 	I 	need 	help, 	I 	would 	rather 	go to 	the 	licensed
professional than to an amateur who has the best of intentions
but bungles the job. There is no biblical blessing on incompe-
tence or inexperience as far as I can see. While his background
was that of a simple carpenter from Galilee, Jesus was called
"rabbi" by those around him. He was granted this title, not from
being thought well-intentioned 	though naive, but because he
demonstrated 	a wisdom and competence 	beyond that of the
other "professionals." 	He was fully professional, practicing a
ministry of teaching and healing with expertise and authority.
His confilct was not as a "nonprofessional" with professionals,
but with the relationship of so-called professional teachers and
religious authorities to the kingdom of God. This tension and
conflict needs to be examined with respect to the way in which
Christian counselors also serve as professional practitioners.
What ls a Professional?
The history and nature of professionalism, particularly as a
phenomenon 	of Western society and culture, has been amply

-- 199 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	199
discussed. 2 William Goode suggests several factors common to
the professional community:
1. Its members are bound by a sense of identity.
2. Once in it, few leave, so that it is a terminal or continuing status
for the most part.
3. Its members share values in common.
4. Its role definitions vis-a-vis both members and non-members
are agreed upon and are the same for all members.
5. Within the areas of communal action there is a common
language which is understood only partially by others.
6. The community has power over its members.
7. Its limits are reasonably clear, though they are not physical and
geographical, but social.
8. Though it does not produce the next generation biologically, it
does so socially through its control over the selection of
professional trainee; and through its training processes it sends
these recruits through an adult socialization process,3
Professional associations are formed in part to establish the
aims, practices, and procedures of a profession. Consequently
these 	professional 	societies develop 	a particular 	self-image.
These images suggest certain qualities inherent in the person
who practices the profession, such as altruistic, tireless, compe-
tent, and accessible. These images also produce models for the
development 	of specialized 	training 	and 	certification. 	The
professional society assembles and develops a body of knowl-
edge and shared skills that enhance the members. And finally, a
professional society establishes 	the standards and criteria by
which new members are trained and certified.
Clearly, a professional in this formal and technical sense is, as
Goode says, a member of a "community within a community."
As an 	attribute, 	a professional 	is 	one 	who 	models 	these
characteristics in an exemplary way in a given situation. A fire
captain, 	in 	response 	to comments 	praising 	the 	bravery 	or
outstanding performance of one of his team, will usually say,
"He is a professional-he 	was just doing his job."
Society looks to the professional societies as a source of
quality 	control, though 	some tensions 	often exist between
governmental 	bodies 	and 	professional 	societies 	that 	share
similar concerns. There is, therefore, a "culture of professional-

-- 200 of 257 --

200 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
ism" that creates the environment and context in which services
are rendered, 	including that of therapy.
The Culture of Professionalism
When we see professionalism as a culture, we are closer to the
conflict and tension existing between the culture of the kingdom
of God and professionalism. The relation of the professions to
society is symbiotic and complex. Professionals serve society in
a variety of ways. They provide safeguards against opportunistic
and incompetent individuals who prey on social needs. They
provide the technicians who run the administrative units of
social institutions like hospitals, mental health clinics, and legal-
aid societies. Professionals provide models and images that
enshrine the higher values of life such as integrity, altruism,
excellence, courage, expanding knowledge, and progress. In a
certain sense, professionals capture the ideals of society and
model them in public view as an incentive to others.
By contrast, society allows professionals a privileged use of
power, not only to define ethical reality, but to practice "social
engineering." 	Society upholds 	the 	role of professionals 	by
granting them courtesies often denied others. One only needs to
examine the assignment of parking privileges around institu-
tions managed by professionals to appreciate this. I myself was
once assigned a first-class seat on a plane to Chicago because my
ticket was typed with the academic degree title "Dr." in front of
my name! The 	airline 	agent was paying obeisance 	to the
mysterious but somehow supernatural 	power of the medical
profession in granting this privilege. Somehow I did not feel
that my Ph.D. would evoke the same courtesy, so I enjoyed my
one-time-only privilege in grateful silence!
While societies depend 	on professionals for the technical
skills and knowledge that contribute to progress, they also tend
to shape the culture of professional communities. The modus
operandi of professionals tends to be a reflection of the culture
in which they practice their skill or trade. A society character-
ized as technological, market oriented, and developed around
the concept of entrepreneurs will tend to produce professionals
who worship technique, 	sacrifice service for fees, and idolize
routinization and efficiency. I might also add, it is no surprise
that professionalism 	has strong alliances with the business

-- 201 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	201
economy as a bellweather 	for the free enterprise 	system. While
generalizations 	may 	seem 	unfair 	and 	extreme, 	we 	should
remember 	that it is the nature 	of a society to shape its own
institutions, 	and the services of a professional become institu-
tionalized and regulated by the society in which they exist. This
is as true of religious 	professionals 	as secular professionals.
The culture of professionalism 	tends also to create a primary
community to which the individual practitioner 	is accountable.
This community serves as the monitor of professional ethics and
the 	provider 	of professional 	status. 	Because 	general 	society
gives over to professional society the prerogatives for determin-
ing the public 	good in terms of the moral use of scientific
knowledge, there is ordinarily little perceived 	conflict between
the ethics 	of professional 	practice 	and the general 	ethics 	of
society. The courts will usually defer to the "expert testimony"
of professionals; 	families and individuals 	tend to be ethically
powerless 	in the face of this legal-professional 	alliance.
When 	conflicts 	do 	arise, 	they 	usually 	take 	the 	form 	of
governmental 	or politically motivated commissions that appeal
more directly to the grass-roots than to professional 	expertise.
The 1986 commission on pornography 	instituted 	by President
Reagan is a case in point. Notably absent in the majority report
were conclusions 	drawn from professionals 	in the social sci-
ences, 	where 	the connection 	between 	pornography 	and vio-
lence does not have strong scientific support.
On the whole, however, 	professional 	societies 	wield 	enor-
mous power under the cloak of objectivity and the prerogative of
sophisticated 	knowledge. 	Power 	is 	no 	longer 	transmitted
through 	consanguine 	relationships 	or contiguous 	social struc-
tures, such as family and community. Instead 	it is transmitted
through 	a knowledge-based 	and 	technically 	closeted 	guild.
Professionals 	at times 	may have 	great 	influence 	as power-
wielders, 	but 	in a morally 	pluralistic 	culture 	they 	tend 	to
become 	an autonomous 	ethical community.
Stanley Hauerwas 	has an insightful 	comment 	on this:
Moral coherence, 	however, 	cannot be supplied 	even by the
professions. For not only are their traditional commitments in-
creasingly qualified by our moral pluralism, no one can live
morally as a professional only .... 	The virtues and skills of the
professions were not, nor can they ever be, sufficient to negotiate
the moral demands of our lives inevitably placed upon us. 4

-- 202 of 257 --

202 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
The ethical culture of the professional community is thus in a
double bind. It is a projection of the culture in which it exists
and thus carries into its own conception of values and goals
those of the general culture. At the same time, it creates its own
ethical culture based on the perceived values of its unique bank
of knowledge 	and 	technology. 	For 	this 	reason, 	the 	moral
conscience of the professional community tends to be selective
and "case-by-case" rather than integrative and wholistic. With
no commonly agreed-on philosophy of personhood as the basis
for the determination of the human good, the professional has to
fall back on legal ethics rather than social ethics. Doing the least
harm in order to promote the most good becomes a safeguard
against irresponsible 	use of professional technique. 	But the
"most good" is also tied to the growing edge of knowledge and
technical skill. Professionals find it difficult to suspend the use
of proven techniques. 	Because progress is the mandate that
drives technique, 	ethical issues for professionals can become
blurred.
As a result, the ethical culture of the professional community
can suffer from a fundamental ambivalence. On the one hand,
professionals self-consciously embody and attempt to model the
higher ideals of the general society. Professionals want to be
known 	for their 	altruistic 	service, 	concern 	for all persons
regardless of economic or social status, and sacrifices made for
the 	general 	good of society. On the 	other hand, the 	same
professionals, as we have suggested, acquire their basic modus
operandi from the culture 	in which they practice, which is
basically pragmatic, opportunistic, and entrepreneurial.
This ethical ambivalence tends to pervade the ethical stance
of the professional community as a whole, though individual
professionals may resolve this through selecting a style that
satisfies their 	own moral commitments. 	If the 	professional
community is viewed as the primary context for professionals,
however, this may constitute a serious problem for those who
are Christians.
Survival in the marketplace for professional services drives
many Christian professionals beyond their original idealistic
and Christian value system. Because the culture at large is one
that 	operates 	more 	or less 	on the 	free 	enterprise 	system,
professional services that do not operate with the marketing
strategy and economic pricing factors of the general culture may

-- 203 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	203
not survive. At this point, professional instincts merge with
business instincts, and the professional entrepreneur 	is born.
One California bank has built its primary advertising strategy
on appealing to the professional community by using testimo-
nials of doctors, dentists, attorneys, and psychologists in their
ads. They each testify to how that particular bank helped them
establish a successful and profitable business through front-end
financing. Professionals, apparently, are good investment risks!
Faculty members of schools for preparing men and women for
the ministry 	of Christian 	counseling 	sometimes 	leave their
academic positions to establish a private practice or a clinic.
Having witnessed this migration, students can hardly be blamed
for questioning the relation between psychotherapy as a minis-
try and as a profession. Psychologists are not the only profes-
sionals who live with the tension between 	the culture of the
kingdom of God and the culture of professionalism. But Chris-
tians who seek to practice therapy as professional persons are
looking for guidance and wisdom in relating the two.
Kingdom Ethics and Professional Priorities
To this point we have been speaking in quite general terms
about the relationship between the culture of professionalism
and the role of the Christian counselor. I have tried to put in
perspective 	the 	concept 	of professionalism 	in general 	with
respect to the culture in which it exists and its own professional
culture. There is a complex symbiotic relation between the two,
even though there are also some inherent tensions and even
contradictions. Christians who enter the field of professional
practice as therapists will discover this tension and struggle.
There is, however, another dimension to the problem. Chris-
tians are accountable to the culture of the kingdom of God. This
is what lies behind the challenge of Alvin Dueck:
To the extent that the Christian is called to be a member ofGod•s
kingdom community and is called to a covenant relationship with
God•s people, to that extent the profession as the primary ethical
community must be seen as problematic,5
If we are bound primarily to the professional community with
regard to professional status and credentials, then its culture
will also determine 	to a significant degree the "professional

-- 204 of 257 --

204 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
code" for delivering therapy. If the modus operandi for the
Christian therapist is also determined largely by the culture in
general, then the "mode" as well as the "code" will stand in
juxtaposition to the mode and code of the kingdom of God.
For the Christian, the kingdom of God constitutes the primary
ethical community. This is clear with regard to the people of
God in the Old Testament and is made explicit by Jesus in his
"Sermon on the Mount." Moreover, the early Christian commu-
nity as described 	in the New Testament 	existed within the
particular culture and worldview of their time and place, yet the
church, as the "community of the kingdom," constituted 	the
primary community for the lives of the individual members. A
kind of "dual citizenship" existed, as evidenced by the counsel
of Jesus, "Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to
God the things that are God's" (Mark 12:17). But when it came
down to final authority, Jesus also said, "No one can serve two
masters" (Matt. 6:24). There is no reason to think that this gave
the early Christians permission to abandon the world to its own
fate and concentrate on their own spiritual pilgrimage. There
are ample warnings against ignoring the needs of those who are
weak and in need of care and support. While the world apart
from service to God may not acknowledge the values and goals
of the kingdom of God, those concerned for the kingdom of God
see the world clearly as belonging to its values and purpose.
Several implications of the kingdom of God can be delineated
as they bear on the role of a Christian as a professional therapist.
1. There is a concern for 	the welfare and status of the
marginal person in society. Woman and slaves, for example,
were pushed aside by certain societies in which the church
came into being. While it gave no ultimatum for the immediate
and radical restructuring 	of the 	society itself, the Christian
community received both women and slaves into full fellow-
ship, along with others who were 	neglected 	by the 	world
culture. Certain restrictions were placed on the role of women
in specific situations, but the ethic of the kingdom of God
required that no distinction be made between Jew and Greek,
slave or free, male or female (Gal. 3:28).6
Provision was made for the widows who became Christian
and were cut off from their non-Christian families (c£ Acts 6).
Paul writes to Philemon concerning his Christian responsibility

-- 205 of 257 --

COUNSELINGAS A PROFESSIONALPRACTICE 	205
to his slave, Onesimus. He is to receive him back as a Christian
brother, not as a slave. James discounts a religion that is in word
only; he says, "Religion that is pure and undefiled before God
and the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their
affliction" Games 1:27). This is followed by the admonition,
"Show no partiality as you hold the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of glory .... 	Has not God chosen those who are
poor in the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom
which he has promised to those who love him?" (2:1, 5).
Where the culture of professionalism tends to be elitist and
selective and even discriminatory through its catering to the rich
and privileged for the sake of success, it runs counter to the
culture of the kingdom of God. This critical tension cuts across
all the professions as a culture and is particularly a problem for
the 	professional 	practice 	of therapy, 	which 	operates 	on a
schedule of fees for services rendered.
2. The kingdom of God bestows a distinctive character on its
members. In contrast, the professional-culture self attempts to
image certain values and ideals to create models of humanitar-
ian service without regard for personal gain, but the actual
modus operandi tends to be pragmatic and self-serving. This is
said about the 	culture 	of professionalism 	in general; 	it is
obviously not true of every professional.
For the culture of the kingdom, however, the character of its
members is manifest in its modus operandi, not merely in its
"ethical code." The New Testament shows little concern for the
ideal of altruism-it 	is much too realistic for that! What is of
concern is the practice of love and aiming at "what is honorable
not only in the Lord's sight but also in the sight of men" (2 Cor.
8:21). "Love does no wrong to a neighbor," wrote Paul (Rom.
13:10). It is the practice oflove in providing for social need and
social justice that characterizes the members of the kingdom.
Christian 	"practice" 	determines 	the modus operandi of the
professional practice.
Thus the character of the Christian professional is based on
Christian practice, not on the professional culture itself. In this
sense, Christians who are professionals can speak of themselves
as professionals who are committed to the service of others as a
form of service to Christ. To combine service with a commit-
ment to the highest level of competence 	in practice is not

-- 206 of 257 --

206 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
merely a professional 	ideal; it is the normative standard of the
kingdom 	of God.
3. The quality of life distinguishes the people of God. The
professional culture tends to be individualistic 	and competitive,
these characteristics 	being a projection of the culture in which
professionalism 	is most pronounced. 	"We are driven!" cries the
automobile ad. This play on words accurately portrays the spirit
of the age and captures the prevailing 	ethos of the professional
culture. 	The quality 	of life in the professional 	community 	is
often notable for its lack of community and personal sharing at
the human 	level. The peer relationships 	of professionals 	can
become 	"tight" 	and 	"clubbish," 	but 	also 	guarded 	and
superficial. Loneliness, 	depression, 	stress, and burnout tend to
be facts of the professional' s life. These are generalizations, 	to
be sure, but they are unfortunately 	all too true even in Christian
professional 	societies.
The culture of the kingdom, by contrast, depicts its members
as having fullness of life, a "peace that passes understanding,"
and 	an 	affection 	and 	intimacy 	of personal 	fellowship 	that
appears somewhat embarrassing to the modem Western individ-
ual. Without the Christian 	community 	acting as a context, the
Christian could all too soon fall victim to the disintegrating 	and
depressing 	character 	of professional 	culture. 	There 	is also an
implication for the very context and kind of therapy offered by
the Christian 	professional. 	If the professional 	is essentially 	a
"private 	person," 	then "private 	practice" 	will indeed be prob-
lematical, 	as Alvin Dueck 	has warned.
4. The kingdom's eschatological aspect provides a context for
measuring immediate gains in terms of ultimate goals. The
culture of the kingdom does not make a virtue of suffering, nor
does it emphasize 	an ethic of resignation. 	It critiques 	suffering
even when 	no immediate 	relief is in sight.
Paul ends 	his great hymn 	of love with this eschatological
perspective: 	"For now we see in a mirror dimly, but then face to
face. Now I know in part; then I shall understand 	fully, even as I
have been fully understood" 	(1 Cor. 13:12). Using the "editorial
we" to speak of his own life perspective, 	Paul writes,
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, to show that the
transcendent power belongs to God and not to us. We are afflicted

-- 207 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	207
in every way, but not crushed; perplexed, but not driven to
despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; struck down, but not
destroyed; always carrying in the body the death of Jesus, so that
the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our bodies. For while
we live we are always being given up to death for Jesus' sake, so
that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh. So
death is at work in us, but life in you (2 Cor. 4:7-12).
"I worked harder than any of them," 	Paul said on another
occasion (1 Cor. 15:10). Lest some should accuse him of not
taking the present seriously, he says, "Do you not know that in a
race all the runners compete, but only one receives the prize?
So run that you may obtain 	it. . . . I pommel 	my body and
subdue 	it, lest after preaching 	to others 	I myself should 	be
disqualified" 	(1 Cor. 9:24, 27). And yet he can also write,
Rejoice in the Lord always; again I will say, Rejoice. Let all men
know your forbearance. The Lord is at hand. Have no anxiety
about anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving let your requests be made known to God. And the
peace of God, which passes all understanding, will keep your
hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus (Phil. 4:4- 7).
These are aspects of the culture of the kingdom of God. This is
the culture that qualifies the culture of the world and the culture
of professionalism. 	The issue is not whether 	one should serve
Christ as a professional 	or nonprofessional. 	The issue is, how
may Christians 	"practice" 	this culture 	of the 	kingdom 	as a
context and resource for their lives and as a modus operandi for
the practice 	of therapy 	as a professional.
Perspectives on Counseling as a Christian Professional
The discussion has come down to this: There is no biblical or
theological 	basis for concluding 	that Christians 	should not be
able to fulfill their Christian calling as counselors or therapists
through 	a professional 	practice. 	Christians 	can and ought to
serve society as professionals 	in all areas, including 	the thera-
peutic 	services.
Christians 	will 	find, 	however, 	that 	both 	the 	professional
culture and the general culture of society need to be qualified
by the ethical character and communal nature of the culture of
the kingdom. 	Certainly 	the church 	itself should serve as the

-- 208 of 257 --

208 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
primary embodiment of the kingdom culture through its corpo-
rate life and the life of its individual 	members. But in the
church, too, the culture of professionalism can be found. In our
society, pastors are also professionals, for the most part, in their
own eyes 	and 	as viewed 	by the 	members 	of the 	church.
Christian therapists who are on church staffs, either as pastors or
as full-time counselors, are not thereby free from the culture of
professionalism.
In some ways it may even be more difficult to discern the
spirit of professionalism when it becomes joined with a "call-
ing" of God to full-time ministry. When the concept of profes-
sion largely defines the role of a Christian 	psychologist or
counselor, the adjective Christian tends to shrink in its power to
define. 	Christians 	who counsel 	in private, 	professional, 	or
community clinical settings may be defined more in terms of
professional status than of ministry practice. At times such a role
identity is unavoidable. Jesus never denied the title "rabbi"
when he was addressed that way. But he preferred to think of
himself as a servant, as one who serves (Mark 10:42-45).
Indeed, the professional role, when fused with the concept of
a Christian calling, can produce an unwarranted arrogance and
authority. 	This tends 	to give an aura of omnipotence 	and
omniscience to the person and renders the professional conduct
of the "called of God" person untouchable. There will always be
an uneasy alliance between the culture of professionalism and
the culture of the kingdom of God as the ultimate reference
point for the Christian professional. But this is no reason to
avoid such a role. Each Christian who counsels can shape the
role in such a way as to make it one's "calling," or occupation, as
we saw in chapter 8.
There really is no single "moder' 	for the Christian profes-
sional. There is only the modus operandi of the Christian who
serves as a professional. And this will be defined and practiced
by each Christian 	within the particular 	setting and circum-
stances of one's practice. The criteria for assessing the degree to
which the kingdom culture is being practiced through profes-
sional therapeutic services have already been discussed and are
found in the characteristics and ethics of the kingdom of God as
contained 	in the 	gospel 	of Jesus 	Christ 	and 	presented 	in
Scripture.

-- 209 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	209
In drawing out the implications of what we have said so far,
let me offer some suggestions for Christians who counsel:
1. Christian counselors should have a strong link with a local
church. The church serves as a community of support, account-
ability, and empowerment 	for its members. 	For a full-time
professional counselor, this community is especially important.
We saw that in the case of Sue Johnson, her role as a Christian
psychologist had become detached from any concept of minis-
try. No doubt she was a faithful church member and, as a
Christian, served in some capacity within the church's life and
ministry. But there did not appear to be any vital connection
between her role as a Christian psychologist in the community
and her context of Christian life and support.
The context in which church members fulfill their calling as
Christians 	becomes 	the 	place 	where 	the 	kingdom 	of God
intersects the world. The church thus invests in the life of its
members so that the culture of the kingdom of God can serve as
a redemptive 	force within 	the 	various cultures 	where 	this
calling is fulfilled. Christians who serve as professional thera-
pists can therefore help the church to interpret its mission to
proclaim the kingdom of God. The issues facing the Christian
therapist concern not only the state or the professional society,
but also the church. The church must take responsibility for
these 	issues. 	This 	cannot 	happen 	unless 	there 	is a vital
connection between 	the Christian counselor and the church.
For example, the personal, mental, or emotional problems that
cause a person to seek out a psychologist or therapist cannot be
isolated from the client's network of other relationships. Clinical
problems that emerge in the therapy session are related to a
client's domestic, marital, family, and social structures. These
networks of relationships 	contain moral, often religious, and
occasionally legal issues that impinge on the therapist's role.
The therapist's own values, convictions, religious beliefs, and
commitments as a Christian also influence this role. Probably no
people in our society other than pastors and priests provide
access to the 	core 	of life in 	all these 	areas as much 	as
professional counselors. Some would say that this is truer of
counselors than of many pastors!
There is much wisdom in extending the pastoral care of the

-- 210 of 257 --

210 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
church into the community through its members who serve as
professional counselors.
2. Counselors should have a support group of Christians who
are not professional therapists. The primary reference group for
the Christian who counsels should be firmly based in a smaller
network 	of other 	Christians 	who 	can 	provide 	perspective,
spiritual support, and a representation 	of the culture 	of the
kingdom of God.
The life of the Christian is a continuing hermeneutical 	task.
We interpret 	the ethic of the kingdom of God through the
lifestyle and kind of "practice" we choose. But this hermeneuti-
cal context 	is not a "private 	practice," 	for here, 	too, the
community of other Christians interprets specific role functions
and professional practices.
The church should not view this group as a substitute 	for
other sources of clinical supervision 	or counsel. What takes
place in the counseling room is to be held in confidence. Yet the
Christian psychologist will encounter 	issues that require 	not
clinical, but Christian perspective 	and interpretation. 	As we
have suggested there is no single model for Christian coun-
selors. Therefore 	each counselor 	will have to develop 	and
sustain his or her own role through a process of experience and
growth, shaped by convictions, confirmed through sharing, and
sustained and affirmed by those who understand and accept its
ambiguity.
The formation of this network will require 	an intentional
commitment to keep oneself accountable and to maintain an
integrative 	growth both personally and in relation to others.
After all, if growth is the goal of therapy, it must also be the
model by which the therapist lives.
3. Christan counselors should have criteria for setting fees.
Christian counselors who set their income by charging fees may
feel anxious and uncertain about this "professional practice."
They should remember, 	however, that the paid professional
pastor or counselor on the staff of a church is also receiving
major income from those to whom the ministerial 	service is
rendered. 	There is a difference in kind, but not in principle,
with the Christian who serves as a professional on a fee basis.
The biblical principle is clearly stated: "The laborer deserves
his wages," Jesus said. And he said this to his disciples who

-- 211 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	211
were to go out and bring the kingdom of God to people who
would, in turn, provide for their necessities 	(Luke 10:7). Paul
picks this up and repeats it in his pastoral counsel to Timothy,
citing the Old Testament law, "You shall not muzzle an ox when
it is treading 	out the grain" (1 Tim. 5:18).
As one whose monthly 	salary is derived 	largely from the
tuition 	paid by students 	who sit in my classes, I too have
suffered moments of doubt as to whether this is a "Christian"
way to serve the best interests of the kingdom of God. I too feel
uneasy when I read the open invitation issued as a mark of the
kingdom of God: "Ho, every one who thirsts, 	come to the
waters; and he who has no money, come, buy and eat! Come,
buy wine and milk without 	money and without 	price" 	(Isa.
55:1). Even if I take this as an eschatological vision, part of the
same scenario where the lion will lie down with the lamb, I
suspect that it is meant to qualify to some degree the spirit of the
world where 	"everything 	has its price."
Many Christians who counsel as professional therapists have
shared with me their dilemma over the need to establish fee
schedules 	for their therapy sessions. The common practice of
charging an hourly fee for a therapy session no doubt is carried
over from the psychiatric, medical model, where an hour of the
"doctor's" time is considered to be a "professional prescription"
for the cure, if not the cure itself.
As one outside this professional :field, I can only make some
general 	suggestions 	for consideration. 	Some have 	found 	it
helpful 	to offer therapy 	on a professional 	basis 	using 	the
principle of an hourly fee schedule, but accommodating those
who desperately 	need the therapy but cannot pay the full fee.
This "graduated fee schedule" 	is usually based on the "ability
to pay" determined 	by a financial statement submitted by the
client. Others have chosen to charge the full fee and allow the
client to "run up a bill," with forgiveness of all or part of this bill
at the end as a gesture of Christian grace.
Some Christian counseling 	clinics set up a special account
that is supplied 	by gifts raised from Christians 	who wish to
render assistance for those who need therapy but are unable to
pay. This 	has the 	advantage 	of maintaining 	a standard 	fee
schedule for all, but provides a special account on which the
therapist can draw to supplement 	what the client pays. In this
model, the ones who pay the regular fee are not subsidizing

-- 212 of 257 --

212 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
those who cannot pay, nor is the therapist required to subsidize
the clinic by accepting less than the regular fee. For some, there
is a real dilemma in wishing to extend their counseling on a
need basis while also having to make a living through this
ministry. The culture of the kingdom of God is never easy to
integrate into the necessities of this world!
The critical issue here is not merely how we "sell" 	our
services as professional counselors. The deeper issue makes all
of us nervous who serve as professionals and Christians-what
are the criteria by which we establish our rationale for living by
the means of the comparatively wealthy while being committed
to serving the needs of all, especially the poor? The formula
statement, "the laborer deserves his wages," does not address
the problem of those who need the "labor" but who cannot
afford to pay the wages. Christians who counsel as professionals
can exercise greater creativity in mediating this tension than
most, because their work fulfills a Christian calling to serve
Christ by meeting the needs of others, and it is a ministry where
Christ is honored.
Summary
We have argued in this chapter that Christian~ can and often
should function in the private and public sector by offering
therapeutic services as a professional. There will be a tension
between the culture of the professional, the standard of living
chosen by the counselor for which the clients must pay, and the
culture of the kingdom of God, in which the poor come first and
the marginal are placed at the center. There is no avoiding this
tension. But Christians who counsel are most aware of it and
therefore most creative in finding a way to position themselves
in the most strategic places to meet human need.
The calling and ministry of the Christian is to become an
advocate for those who become marginalized and weak. Jesus
said that he would send another paraclete (advocate) in the form
of the Holy Spirit who would dwell in those who became his
disciples. This Spirit enables the Christian who counsels to
become a moral advocate as well as skilled caregiver. In the next
chapter we will see what this means.

-- 213 of 257 --

COUNSELING AS A PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE 	213
Notes
1. Alvin Dueck, "Ethical Contexts of Healing: Ecclesia and Praxis,"
Pastoral Psychology 36, no. 1 (Fall 1987): 53.
2. See for example: B. J. Bledstein, The Culture of Professionalism:
The Middle Class and Development of Higher Education in America
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 197~); E. Freidson, The Professions
and Their Prospects (Beverly Hills, Calif.: Sage Publications, 1973); P.
Good and D. Kraybill, Perils of Professionalism (Scottdale, Pa.: Herald
Press, 1982); William J. Goode, "Community Within a Community: The
Professions," American Sociological Review 22 (1957): 194-200; K.
Lebacqz, Professional Ethics: Power and Paradox (Nashville: Abing-
don, 1985); M. S. Larson, The Rise of Professionalism: A Sociological
Analysis (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977).
3. William J. Goode, "Community Within a Community: The
Professions," American Sociological Review 22 (1957): 194.
4. Stanley Hauerwas, A Community of Character: Toward a Con-
structive Christian Social Ethic (Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1981), 126.
5. Dueck, "Ethical Contexts of Healing," 55.
6. For a discussion of the role of women in the church, see my essay
"The Resurrection of Jesus as Hermeneutical Criterion: A Case for
Sexual Parity in Pastoral Ministry," Theological Student's Fellowship
Bulletin (March-April 1986): 9-15.

-- 214 of 257 --

11
The 	Counselor 	as
Moral Advocate
Therapeutic 	intervention 	will invariably he some kind of
moral invasion. This is true, first, because professional caregiv-
ers are hound by a code of ethics that resides in the counseling
standards of most professional societies. Second, professional
caregivers enter into the moral structure of human life, because
people 	are intrinsically 	moral beings. 	Lewis 	Smedes 	puts it as
plainly as can he said:
We have a deep primitive sense that morality is woven into the
fabric of our humanness. Morality is not a con game that makes
losers out of those who play it seriously. It is not a false rumor
planted in an insecure society to help the weak keep the powerful
in check by playing on their conscience. Nor is morality just an
impressive name for the strong feelings we have about some
things, a word we use to add some clout to our complaints.
Morality is a basic component of any human sort of life, a reality
we feel surely even if we cannot define it clearly. We do have
choices, and they are sometimes between real moral options. The
choice we make can put us in the wrong with God and our ideal
selves-or 	leave us in the right. And being in the right means
being in harmony with God's design for our humanity. 1
The question of moral values and psychotherapy has provoked
much discussion. While most professional caregivers will scru-
pulously avoid projecting personal values on the therapeutic
process, many strongly feel that the therapeutic process cannot
he entirely value free. Perry London, for example, says that "at
some level of abstraction, it is probably correct to declare that
214

-- 215 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS MORALADVOCATE 	215
every aspect of psychotherapy presupposes some implicit moral
docbine."2
The very attempt to change the behavior of a client intrudes
into the value system of the client 	Moral issues arise because
the resulting behavioral change will inevitably produce social
consequences affecting other people's lives. There can be no
"value-free" therapy, even though the caregiver must respect
the value orientation of the client
This produces 	a tension 	for the 	Christian 	who practices
therapeutic intervention. This is especially true of the approach
to counseling proposed in this book. Growth goals relate to the
moral and spiritual horizon of human life. One cannot separate
therapeutic 	gain from this horizon, even though therapeutic
gains can be limited and relative. Because the therapeutic gains
are actual changes and growth in the person, the larger, more
comprehensive 	growth goals will also be involved.3
In 	discussing 	these 	issues 	and 	suggesting 	a strategy for
counseling as a form of moral advocacy, I will develop two basic
themes: the moral context for therapeutic intervention from a
Christian perspective, and the role of the professional caregiver
as moral advocate.
The Moral Context for Therapeutic Interoention
In Christian theology, ethical concern is grounded in the
character of God, and therefore it is intrinsic to the nature and
value of persons as created in the image of God. While the
character of God is the basis for theological ethics, it also is the
ground for a moral foundation for all human action and life. Karl
Barth puts it this way:
The morality or goodness of human conduct which ethics investi-
gates has to do with the validity of what is valid for all human
action, the origin of all constancies, the worth of everything
universal, the rightness of all rules. With such concepts as validity,
origin, worth, and rightness we denote provisionally and generally
that which transcends the inquiries of psychology, cultural history,
and jurisprudence-the 	transcendent factor which in contrast is
the theme of ethical inquiry.4

-- 216 of 257 --

216 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Theological ethics thus grounds values, not in individual and
personal values alone, but in the personal character and purpose
of God as the transcendent content of all values.
Moral criteria are not essentially religious, but are fundamen-
tally human. Concepts of human nature will thus determine
moral criteria. For Christians, the moral criteria of human life
are personal and social, not abstract and impersonal. This is
because humans are essentially social beings, created in the
form of "fellow-humanity," or co-humanity. The command is to
love God and the neighbor. One of the first ethical questions
raised in the Bible is the question put to Cain after he had
murdered his brother: "Where is Abel your brother?" (Gen. 4:9).
The command of God comes in the form of concern for fellow-
humanity as well as for the character of the individual life.
Christian 	moral criteria 	are 	therefore 	derived 	from God's
revelation of the nature and purpose of life.
Of central concern to theological ethics in attempting to
provide an answer to the questions of humanity, morality, and
the commandment of God is the role of Scripture. Several
alternatives present themselves, each of which has advocates in
Christian moral theology:
1. The Bible is prescriptive, providing highly specific, bind-
ing moral instruction. In this view, the Bible is used as a
manual for moral law in a case-by-case situation;
2. The Bible is instructive, providing an overarching set of
values, ideals, and principles. In this view, the Bible is
used as a textbook in establishing moral criteria, to be
applied in specific cases;
3. The Bible is illustrative, providing a compendium of moral
examples grounded in the life, teaching, and power of
Christ as a moral guide for Christian ethics. In this view,
the Bible becomes a compendium of moral wisdom.
While each of these alternatives contributes something of
value to the formation of a Christian ethical value system, each
also falls short of providing a methodology for making good
moral decisions, especially in critical situations where there
appear to be moral predicaments. James Gustafson, for example,
writes,
The Bible is more important for helping the Christian community
to interpret the God whom it knows in its existential faith than it is

-- 217 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS MORAL ADVOCATE 	217
for giving a revealed morality that is to be translated and applied in
the contemporary world .•.. 	The Christian moral life, then, is not a
response to moral imperatives, but to a Person, the living God ....
What the Bible makes known, then, is not a morality but a reality, a
living presence to whom man responds. 5
I agree with Gustafson that the use of the Bible as a methodolog-
ical tool in determining the will of God falls short of its intended
purpose. But I would argue that the Bible, as the revealed Word
of God, provides 	the 	basis 	for establishing 	a theology 	of
Christian moral life. This is an important distinction.
The inadequacy of the three alternatives cited is fundamen-
tally methodological, not theological. That is, the Bible cannot
be used as a method to arrive at ethical principles 	or moral
criteria that can be abstracted 	from the participation 	of God
himself in the moral situation of human life. Or, to put it another
way, the Bible cannot substitute for moral freedom grounded in
moral responsibility. While the Bible clearly has value in giving
authoritative status to the will of God as a determining factor in
theological 	ethics 	applied 	through 	pastoral 	care, the 	Bible
cannot be seen primarily as an ethical textbook, neither percep-
tively, nor instructively, nor illustratively. There is a wrong use
of the Bible as well as a right use in attempting to discern God's
will in critical pastoral situations.
It 	is wrong 	to use 	selected 	proof texts 	to find biblical
strategies or solutions to modem problems. The Pharisees had a
"proof text" from the Old Testament 	Scriptures 	when 	they
confronted the woman caught in adultery and presented her to
Jesus for judgment. The correct use of the Bible in such cases is
to take up the hermeneutical 	task of discerning the purpose of
Scripture in guiding us to uphold the true nature of humanity
through responsible decisions and actions. In this way Scripture
serves the 	moral freedom 	of God to act redemptively 	and
creatively. Scripture does not proof-text moral law but authorita-
tively upholds the moral will of God in restoring the moral and
human quality of life. Jesus, for example, used the Old Testa-
ment Scriptures to validate God's purpose for the Sabbath and
thus support his actions of healing on the Sabbath. He charged
his adversaries with using the Scriptures wrongly in seeking to
"catch" him in violation of a specific law.
It is also wrong to attempt to use the Bible to find parallels

-- 218 of 257 --

218 	CHRISTIANSWHO COUNSEL
between our situation and that of the biblical writers. Where
such parallels seem to exist (e.g., Rahab's "friendly welcome to
the spies," Heb. 11:31), one cannot assume a direct correlation
of ethical principle involved, because faith is the connecting
reality, not moral principle. Besides, this would make the Bible
largely irrelevant when such parallels cannot be found. The
correct use of the Bible is to read such stories so as to find
ourselves confronted by the same demand and command of God
with the result that we act with faith, and not disbelief (cf. Rom.
14:22-23).
It is wrong, moreover, to attempt to extrapolate from the Bible
one primary ethical principle or norm, be it love, the imitation of
Christ, the kingdom of God, or the gospel as over and against
law. The Bible itself, as the Word of God, would then be forced
to surrender 	its authority to a principle 	or norm that stands
independently of the Bible as an authoritative guide to faith and
practice. This would be a return to the concept of autonomous
morality, where one person, together with the Bible, possesses
an absolute ethical criterion. The Bible shows, however, that all
human actions and decisions 	can be inherently 	moral, and
therefore we are accountable to the living God who will judge
every decision 	and act based 	on his will and purpose 	for
humanity (cf. 1 Cor. 4:1-5; 	2 Cor. 10:18; Rom. 14:10-12).
The Bible itself forces us to see that there is an eschatological
dimension to moral actions. No ethical system or moral principle
can serve as an absolute criterion in the face of this eschatologi-
cal claim on human moral life and actions. Theological ethics,
therefore, must bring this eschatological perspective to bear in
assisting pastoral care in deciding the critical moral issues of the
present day.
God's moral will upholds created structures of human life and
society, including the moral law by which human moral values
and principles are determined. Human moral instincts are thus
given by God and are to be used to uphold the quality of human
life that God has created. Jesus validated the use of these moral
instincts when he argued that the same human instincts that
provided for the welfare of animals on the Sabbath ought to be
considered as the basis for permitting him to heal a woman on
the Sabbath (Luke 10:15-16; 	Matt. 12:9-13).
When Jesus stated that it is "lawful to do good on the sabbath ..
(Matt. 12:12), he pointed to God's purpose for people as an

-- 219 of 257 --

THE COUNSELORAS MORALADVOCATE 	219
ultimate 	moral value. The determination 	of what is "good"
cannot be made at the expense of the value of the person. So,
too, in saying, "The sabbath was made for man, not man for the
sabbath" (Mark 2:27), Jesus expressed the moral will of God as
that which is for the good of the human person. In this case we
see that the design of the Sabbath, which also was given to
uphold a moral value, must be modified when necessary to
accommodate the moral value of"doing good." God's moral law
as expressed in the commandments is grounded in God's moral
freedom. This means that forgiveness granted where the com-
mandment condemns does not constitute a moral contradiction.
The moral freedom of God to offer forgiveness is the antecedent
for the commandment, in the same way that God's moral being
is the source of all moral action.
Jesus' 	presence 	brought 	the 	eschatological 	goal into the
already revealed design and purpose of God as institutionalized
in the Jewish religion. At critical points of pastoral care, Jesus
interpreted the moral will of God in terms of the goal toward
which both design and purpose point. He did this in such a way
that both the design and stated purpose of divine law were
modified to allow for a moral decision that upheld as its goal the
whole and healed person.
The 	relation 	of God's 	design, 	purpose, 	and goal can be
illustrated in figure 4.
GOD
I
I
I
I
DESIGN!
------->-,, ', ...
GOD
',,,'\.PURPOSE 	I
--------~
Figure 4
..............
GOD
',,, 	GOAL
:=.---->
In this diagram the critical point of moral discernment 	is
found where design, purpose, and goal are intersected by the
vertical line representing God's contemporary presence. Making

-- 220 of 257 --

220 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
moral decisions entails having accurate moral instincts not only
as to what constitutes the good, but also as to what constitutes
God's will in terms of his purpose and goal. The ultimate source
of moral wisdom is the moral freedom of God to move the events
in history toward his good and glorious goal. There is, therefore,
a purpose that must be interpreted 	in the process of making
moral decisions.
Certain designs, such as the Sabbath as a literal seventh day of
the week, have been created by God and invested with moral
authority. The moral content of the Sabbath as commandment,
however, is read in terms of its purpose and goal for people.
Jesus correctly read this moral purpose and goal for the Sabbath
in the 	act of healing. 	The 	Pharisees, 	who accused him of
violating the moral law, abstracted the law of the Sabbath from
the moral freedom of God and so failed to see the greater moral
value in healing. Jesus thus made a moral intervention into the
situation where 	human life had become tormented 	and de-
formed through disease. The law itself in the form of command-
ment could not produce this moral result. This intervention
produced a "growth process" in which God's moral purpose was
released through the actions of one who could act as an advocate
of God's purpose and goal.
In :figure 4, design first catches our attention as created or
instituted by God. Some invest the concept of "God's design"
with absolute and unchangeable moral character. But in reality,
what God has "designed" may be the easiest for God to change
for the sake of achieving his purpose and goal. Surely not every
design created by God will be changed so long as "heaven and
earth" continue as his created order. But we should be careful
not to uphold a "design" for life with such moral passion that we
forget or lose sight of the person who lives within that design.
God's moral purpose and goal are attached to a process, not
merely to a design.
Many have asked whether monogomous marriage might not
be an example of a design that has an ideal or absolute moral
character. My response is that it has a relative moral character as
a design. This seems true for two reasons. First, marriage is one
form of a created social order in which God's purpose and goal
for persons 	can be 	realized. 	But it is not the 	only form;
otherwise, those who do not marry would fail to realize God's
purpose or would lack some moral quality that can be gained

-- 221 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS MORAL ADVOCATE 	221
only by marriage. Second, God has demonstrated that he could
realize his purpose and goal through forms of marriage other
than the ideal of monogomous relationships. This is plainly the
case in the Old Testament, 	for example, 	in the promise 	of
Abraham coming into reality through Jacob and the four women
through whom the twelve tribes of Israel were conceived.
At the same time, we could say that a monogamous relation-
ship more closely approximates an order of marriage that fulfills
the sexual, covenantal, and familial values implicit to the image
of God than other forms such as polygamy. We can argue for the
relative value of a moral order based on a certain design without
attaching 	the 	absolute 	moral 	value 	to the 	design. 	This 	is
important for counselors who are confronted with situations in
which the formal design of the marriage meets the "ideal," but
the life of the persons living in this form becomes inhuman and
immoral 	as measured 	by God's 	purpose 	for humans 	living
together. In the model that I present here, moral decisions are
made where God's purpose and goal intersect with the actual
life of the person involved. On this basis, we can support those
whose only recourse 	is to separate from a marriage that has
become abusive and immoral.
On the same basis, children may need to be removed from
parents whose claim to "natural rights" and "moral authority"
becomes nullified by their failure to create a moral structure of
life as measured by God's will and purpose. God's "ideal" 	is
always a living and creative life undergirded 	by promise and
redemptive 	grace. All else is relative to that goal.
In making intervention 	into the life situation of persons for
whom there 	is a personal 	dysfunction, 	there 	may also be a
critical moral issue at stake. This moral issue may not be explicit
in the therapeutic dynamic, but the larger, more comprehensive
situation of the client may represent 	a clear moral dilemma.
Even then, there is likely to be a "perceived" 	moral issue on the
part of the client. Within the growth process by which the moral
context of therapy can be understood, the therapist can also act
as an intermediary 	of the divine moral will. This is a kind of
moral advocacy by which the therapist 	fulfills a ministry 	of
pastoral care as well.

-- 222 of 257 --

222 	CHRISTIANSWHO COUNSEL
The Role of the Professional Caregiver as Moral Advocate
We have said that the role of God as moral advocate occurs
where an apparent moral dilemma makes a person vulnerable to
the moral law itself. The moral will of God is invested in a goal
for persons that often can be reached only through an interven-
tion that talces the form of moral advocacy. The moral advocacy
is for the will of God as the goal, not an advocacy for individuals
as possessing absolute moral "rights" regardless of their conduct
or actions toward other people.
By moral advocacy I mean extending divine grace to persons
who are guilty of breaking the moral law or who are suffering a
loss of personhood through the existence of a structure man-
dated 	by moral law. Moral advocacy reminds 	the marginal
person of the moral right for personal dignity, freedom from
abusive relationships, and full parity in social and communal
life.
Moral advocacy can also be a form of pastoral care, not only in
the sense of the broader responsibilities of clergy, but also in the
narrower role of the professional caregiver. The pastor may offer
pastoral care through the church, but may also be trained to
provide counsel, therapy, and intervention through a variety of
private and public agencies. Our focus here is on the caregiving
provided at times of crisis, when life has become difficult if not
impossible, 	where 	relationships 	have been 	distorted 	if not
destructive, and where the tragic contravenes common sense
and even faith fails.
We have in view here such situations as the physical and
emotional abuse of a spouse in a lawful marriage; the abuse of
children 	in families and social agencies; 	the breakdown 	of
marriage and the trauma of divorce; the sudden death of a loved
one; lingering illness or disease that destroys the dignity and
value of life; addiction to substances or sex; and the loss of will,
nerve, meaning, and purpose marked by midlife crisis.
Because these life crises strike at the very heart of what it is to
be human, these 	situations constitute 	a moral dilemma and
require moral advocacy. One way or another, a breakdown or
failure of life constitutes a threat to the value of human life or to
faith in God as an ultimate value.
The crisis situations of life are borderline 	situations with
regard to the command of God and can appear ambiguous with

-- 223 of 257 --

mE 	COUNSELOR AS MORAL ADVOCATE 	223
regard to what God's will might be. Here "normal life" cannot
provide the norms for making decisions or finding a direction
forward. Too often caregivers make the mistake of using the
normal as the paradigm for giving counsel and advice to those in
abnormal situations.
In 	theological 	ethics, 	as in 	medicine, 	we 	face the 	real
problems 	when 	normality and health are absent. Facing an
inhuman situation, the caregiver must become the advocate of
the marginal person. At this point the general principles 	of
health and moral order simply do not provide this kind of moral
advocacy. The "normal" cannot become the advocate for the
essential worth of the "abnormal" measured against the "nor-
mal." The "normal" is assumed to be "good," and what is not
normal by this definition can appear to be morally deficient as
well as abnormal, or not normal. That is what is meant· by
"borderline" 	situations.
Many of the crises we have noted are borderline 	situations
where the command of God is ambiguous. This ambiguity exists
because the command and moral will of God are rooted in his
freedom, which demands that the person be free to discern and
do God's will. If God's moral will were absolutely embodied in
a commandment, such as "thou shalt not bear false witness,"
then we could conclude in every case that telling a lie is wrong.
Yet a moral dilemma occurs when a person is faced with a
situation in which telling 	the truth also means betraying 	a
person whose life depends on one's action. Ethicists have used
situations like this to argue that we must choose the higher
moral law-saving 	a life-over 	the lower moral law-telling
the truth. But this way of resolving ambiguity plays off one
moral law against another.
Often I am asked about a case in which one marriage partner
has had an affair that is unknown 	to the 	spouse. Through
confession, repentance, 	and therapeutic 	work the affair has
ended. 	But now the question 	remains, is there not a moral
obligation to inform the 	spouse of this infidelity and 	seek
forgiveness and restoration? Can this be kept a secret from the
spouse and the relationship still be built on mutual trust with
moral integrity?
My response is to view this as a situation in which a moral
decision has to be made. I ask the counselee to discern what the
purpose and goal of such a "moment of truth" are intended to

-- 224 of 257 --

224 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
produce. Is this confession primarily for the moral value of the
person making the confession? Having "told the truth" to a
partner, has one now fulfilled the moral law of truth-telling,
regardless of the consequences?
In my experience of pastoral counseling, the decision can go
either way, depending on the situation. In cases where he or she
decides not to inform the spouse of a past act of infidelity, the
counselee 	has decided 	to bear the 	moral responsibility 	to
uphold the good of the other, who may not be able to handle the
burden if it were shifted. For facts can be told, as in the case of
reporting an affair that has now ended. But the moral truth and
character of that event have become deeply embedded in the
fabric of the one who has confessed, repented, and experienced
healing 	and 	forgiveness from God. For the 	spouse to be
integrated into this process, the unfaithful person must not only
disclose facts, but also share the moral basis for the facts.
My point is that moral responsibility is not merely to an
abstract principle of truth-telling at all costs, but to the effect of
truth 	on the 	structures 	of human 	relationships, 	which are
already weak and fragile. It is sometimes easier to destroy a
relationship with the truth than with a lie. 6 Of course these
situations are fraught with peril and clouded with ambiguity! All
the more reason, I would say, that we need to have an acquired
sense of moral wisdom and not merely a "knee-jerk" moral
reaction.
God's moral will is not a higher principle or higher moral law.
Rather, it is directed toward the goal of human life; his moral
laws are given so as to direct us toward that goal. If God himself
were present in every case where moral laws collide, we would
instinctively tum to him for assurance as to what would be the
best moral decision. We would assume, then, that God's moral
freedom is itself the greater moral principle.
This appears to be the way Jesus functioned when he was
confronted with the collision between human values and the
moral law as stated in the Old Testament Scriptures. He used
the freedom of God's moral will to become the advocate for the
person. This advocacy was clearly not to justify the situation or
the immoral actions (as in the case of the woman caught in
adultery), but to restore and liberate the person to realize God's
moral will.
The Christian caregiver who provides pastoral care from the

-- 225 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS MORAL ADVOCATE 	225
perspective 	of theological ethics also acts as an advocate for
God's moral will in a dual sense. First, the caregiver acts as an
advocate of God's presence 	in the situation. This is possible
because the risen Christ has sent his Spirit as the indwelling
presence 	of God-"we 	are the temple 	of the 	living God"
(2 Cor. 6:16; c£ John 14:18-23; 	1 Cor. 6:19; Col. 1:27). The
caregiver 	thus 	manifests 	the 	"real 	presence" 	of Christ 	in
advocating to and on behalf of the one who is in a "borderline"
situation.
Second, the caregiver acts as an advocate of the person's moral
freedom 	to be 	a whole 	and functioning 	person. 	Here 	the
caregiver does not merely stand in the counseling relationship
as a moral authority, dispensing 	moral law or making moral
decisions on behalf of the one who is caught in the moral
dilemma. Rather, the caregiver advocates the client's 	moral
authority in being a person who bears the divine image.
In counseling from a Christian perspective, we must assume
parity on both sides of the situation. The moral authority is not
lodged merely on the side of the intermediary. The encounter at
the human level produces the moment in which the moral
freedom and moral will of God are released as a motive power
for change and growth. God's moral authority is demonstrated in
healing and transforming, not only in judging and condemning.
For example, when a woman is suffering abuse in a marriage
relationship, she will often feel morally powerless due to her
supposed 	obligation toward her marriage partner. This may
even 	be 	reinforced 	by a feeling 	that 	she 	is being 	rightly
punished for real or imagined failings in her role. Her counselor
will need to advocate God's moral authority in order to intercept
the woman's relentless 	sense of duty toward a "law of mar-
riage." The counselor must stand with the victim over and
against the so-called legal right of a marriage partner to inflict
pain. In this sense the caregiver is willing to place himself or
herself where God's moral will is perceived to be.
At the 	same time, the caregiver will advocate the moral
authority that properly belongs to the victim of the abuse, but
who feels totally without that moral freedom and authority. In
this case the caregiver does not possess moral authority by
virtue of a role or professional skill. Rather, the moral authority
resides in the nature of personhood itself as determined by God
to be free for the other in a healthy relationship.

-- 226 of 257 --

226 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
It should 	be 	understood 	that 	a Christian 	perspective 	on
caregiving does not introduce moral criteria that are not already
present in the human situation. There is no "Christian ethic"
that substitutes Christian morality for human morality. What the
Christian can provide through caregiving is the advocacy of God
himself. God is the power that liberates 	the moral freedom
belonging to persons, for he gave that freedom to us as a divine
endowment.
Those who provide 	caregiving without 	such a theological
ethic can offer therapeutic intervention and even moral wisdom
in directing the client toward the good. Yet the caregiver may
experience 	moral ambivalence 	about serving in an explicitly
moral 	role 	without 	a 	specific 	theological 	orientation. 	The
Christian is free of this moral ambivalence and can clarify the
moral criteria involved in what is otherwise an ambiguous moral
dilemma. What might be an "easy out" for the one who seeks a
resolution of the moral dilemma on strictly self-centered terms
will be intensified into a true moral issue by the one who brings
theological ethics to bear.
Theological 	ethics 	do 	not 	solve 	problems, 	says 	Helmut
Thielicke; 	instead they intensify 	problems 	by showing the point
of any particular decision.
Its task is that of clarification. It does not seek to spell out precisely
what must be done. It simply lays bare the full implications of that
"what," so that the underlying issue of the particular decision is
heard as a claim. Ethics in effect complicates matters by analyzing
the contents of the decision. But there is a counterbalancing
simplification for the one who then decides: When it comes to the
point of actually taking concrete action his decision is simplified
by the gift of the Holy Spirit.7
The Holy Spirit is called the "paraclete" 	in the New Testa-
ment (John 14:16, 26; 15:26; 16:7). One translation of this word
is "advocate," one called to the side of another. Jesus intimates
that this has been his own role when he says, "I will pray the
Father, and he will give you another Counselor [paraclete] ...
even the Spirit of truth .... 	he dwells with you, and will be in
you" (John 14:16-17).
The gift of the Holy Spirit as the indwelling presence of God's
moral will resolves the moral ambivalence otherwise present in
the caregiver. This advocacy frees the situation from the moral

-- 227 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS MORALADVOCATE 	227
autonomy that can provide the ..easy out"-my 	pain gives me a
right to get even with the one who hurt me. Or, the injustice that
I have suffered gives me the right to rescind my commitment.
Yet this advocacy that binds all persons, even victims of their
own immoral acts or the acts of others, to the moral will of God
also sets free those bound by the inhuman laws and practices of
others. One is also thus set free to forgive, which is a moral
action related to one's goal of healing.
It should not be supposed, however, that the Holy Spirit is a
moral criterion that counters other moral criteria. There is a form
of moral autonomy that would claim the Holy Spirit as the
content of one's own conscience. But the Holy Spirit clarifies
that the content of God's moral will is intrinsic to personhood as
a gift and goal and convinces us of the moral authority by which
we act in accordance with these moral criteria. The Holy Spirit
is 	not 	a "simplicity" 	on this 	side 	of complexity, 	but 	the
simplicity 	on the 	other 	side of complexity. 	Oliver Wendell
Holmes is reported to have said, "I would not give a fig for the
simplicity on this side of complexity; but for the simplicity on
the other side of complexity, I would give my life."
Having surveyed the moral options in a given situation from
the perspective of the moral law by which human persons live,
and having calculated the moral implications of an action, we
cannot ultimately 	defend on abstract moral criteria alone the
decision 	that is finally made on the basis of theological 	ethics. If
it were always possible to give this kind of justification, many of
our actions would become incredible 	in the face of the moral
ambivalence inherent in the complexity of life, where good and
evil are mingled. The moral advocate seeks out the moral issue
on the basis of what one reckons God declares to be good.
We have ample revelation of the criteria for this "good" based
on biblical testimony to God's purpose and goal for humanity.
Jesus became impatient 	with those who quibbled 	over these
decisions. Yet there is no shortcut to these decisions, as the good
lies on the other side of moral complexity, not on this side of it.
When Abraham finally decides to sacrifice his son because it is
God's will, there is no way back to the moral criteria by which
lie made that decision (Gen. 22). That is, there are no universal
moral principles that justify this action. Yet he is bound by the
moral will of God to obey.
When Jesus decided 	that the cross and his own incredible

-- 228 of 257 --

228 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
obedience "unto death" were the good, because it was the will
of the Father for the good of humankind, the simplicity of his
decision lay on the other side of moral reason alone. There is no
other way to practice moral advocacy, for we are not merely
betting that the decision is the best one jmd that others using the
same criteria will always come out on the same side. The issues
are ultimately those that link the divine moral will with the
human moral decision, and the personal character of God with
the character and quality of life advocated here on earth.
In the end, theological ethics insist that the moral outcome of
therapeutic intervention bears the weight of God's own moral
will. Jesus provided for this when he said, "Whatever you bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matt. 16:19; cf. John 20:22-
23).
It should be remembered that this is a costly kind of advocacy.
The caregiver must be prepared to suffer the judgment of those
who feel it necessary to uphold the moral law as interpreted by
legal and formal structures. The presence of the liberating moral
will of God will often appear ambiguous and even wrong to
those who find security in "being good" as defined by legal
morality.
For this reason, Dietrich Bonhoeffer insisted that the task of
Christian ethics is not to be good, but to do the will of God.
What is of ultimate importance is now no longer that I should
become good, or that the condition of the world should be made
better by my action, but that the reality of God should show itself
everywhere to be the ultimate reality. Where there is faith in God
as the ultimate reality, all concern with ethics will have as its
starting-point that God shows Himself to be good, even if this
involves the risk that I myself and the world are not good but
thoroughly bad.s
For Bonhoeffer, this meant that we must be prepared to be
regarded as having become guilty in order to be the responsible
advocate for those who are victims of the established order.9 But
this can only be the kind of guilt that Christ himself bore, as the
advocate of God and the advocate of the sinner in the same
movement.
It finally must be said that the role of the caregiver as moral
advocate is an extension of the body of Christ, if it is to be

-- 229 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS MORAL ADVOCATE 	229
considered 	in the way that we have set forth. The kind of
pastoral 	care that 	provides 	this 	intervention 	and 	advocacy
should be offered in such a way that the primary caregiver is not
also the 	sole advocate. A model of caregiving thus 	would
include these guidelines:
I. The caregiver should be related to a Christian community
where his or her spiritual and personal life is nurtured and
affirmed as belonging to Christ and indwelt by Christ's
Spirit
2. The Christian community that upholds the integrity and
ministry of the caregiver must be a theologically informed
community as to the 	nature 	of pastoral care as moral
advocacy.
3. The Christian community makes explicit its complicity in
the moral advocacy of the primary caregiver; this is done as
a covenant between the community (or its representatives)
and the caregiver made prior to specific actions of caregiv-
ing that involves moral advocacy.
4. The 	primary 	caregiver, 	while 	preserving 	the
confidentiality 	of a counseling 	relationship, 	seeks 	the
wisdom of the Spirit through the caregiving network in
providing 	advocacy where 	moral criteria alone do not
resolve the complexity; that is, where the "mind of Christ"
is seen to be the determining factor and will be one's final
appeal.
5. In making these 	guidelines 	operational, the caregiving
network must be carefully selected and prepared to serve
as a team that understands and provides moral advocacy for
pastoral care.
Summary
We have sought in this chapter to establish the theoretical
grounds for the role of the Christian counselor or caregiver as
moral advocate. We have argued that the moral authority for this
kind of advocacy is grounded in the moral freedom of God. This
moral freedom is not arbitrary or capricious. God has revealed
his nature and purpose to be consistent and creative in being
and upholding that which is "good" and that which promotes
the good. When persons are in need of counseling, they are

-- 230 of 257 --

230 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
often also in situations that are critical and even life threatening.
Christians who counsel must also be prepared to act as moral
agents of God's gracious purpose 	in making intervention 	in
crisis situations. This places the ministry of counseling in the
context of pastoral care. The mode of delivering pastoral care
through crisis intervention will be discussed in the next chapter.
Notes
1. Lewis Smedes, Mere Morality (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1983),
vii. Other books by Smedes that deal with the moral issues in making
decisions include Caring and Commitment: Learning to Live the Love
We Promised (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1988) and Choices:
Making Right Decisions in a Complex World (San Francisco: Harper &
Row, 1986).
2. Perry London, Modes and Morals of Psychotherapy (New York:
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964), 6. For other sources on the issue of
moral values in therapy see: Charlotte Buhler, Values in Psychotherapy
(New York: Free Press, 1962); Mary Ann Carroll et al., Ethics in the
Practice of Psychology (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1985);
Gerald Corey, "Ethical Issues in Counseling and Psychotherapy," in
Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy ed. Gerald
Corey (Belmont, Cali£: Wadsworth. 	1977); James C. Hansen, 	ed.
(Luciano L'Abate, vol. ed.), Ethics, Legalities and the Family Thera-
pist (Rockville, Md.: Aspen Publications, 1982); John Hoffman, Ethical
Confrontation in Counseling (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1979); Marshall 	C. Lowe, Value Orientation 	in Counseling and
Psychotherapy, 2d ed. (Cranston, R.I.: Carroll Press, 1976); J. Peterson,
Counseling and Values (Scranton, Pa.: International Textbook, 1970);
W. Yoell et al., "Marriage, Morals and Therapeutic Goals: A Discus-
sion," Journal of Behavioral Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry 2
(1971): 127-32.
3. Gerald Corey suggests that therapy should not be synonymous
with preaching or teaching. "This is not to say that therapists should
maintain an indifferent, neutral, or passive role by simply silently
listening to and accepting everything the client reports. Instead, I
propose that therapists challenge the values of their clients, and, if they
care, when they sense that certain behavior is destructive, they will
confront their clients and invite them to examine the pay-offs and the
consequences of their actions. A core issue in therapy is the degree to
which the therapist's values should enter into a therapeutic relation-
ship. A therapist cannot have goals for clients and yet be devoid of
value judgments, for goals are based on our values" ("Ethical Issues in
Counseling and Psychotherapy," 	222).
4. Karl Barth, Ethics (New York: Seabury, 1981), 4.

-- 231 of 257 --

THE COUNSELOR AS MORAL ADVOCATE 	231
5. James Gustafson, "Christian Ethics," in Religion, ed. Paul Ramsey
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 	1965), 317.
6. For further reading on this subject, I recommend the essay by
Dietrich Bonhoeffer, "What Is Meant by 'Telling the Truth'?" in his
book Ethics, ed. Eberhard Bethge (New York: Macmillan, 1955), 363-
72. Bonhoeffer cites the case of a teacher who asks a student in front of
the class whether it is true that his father often comes home drunk. It is
true, but the child denies it. The family has its own secret and must
preserve it. To this reality the child loyally responds, even in denying
the fact of the question. The teacher, says Bonhoeffer, has asked an
"untruthful" 	question 	and has placed 	the child 	in an untenable
position.
7. Helmut Thielicke, Theological Ethics: Foundations, vol. 1 (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1979), 621.
8. Bonhoeffer, Ethics, 188-89.
9. Ibid., 245.

-- 232 of 257 --

12
Dynamics 	of Pastoral Care
in Counseling 	Praxis
"John, I am not a pastor nor am I a theologian," Sue Johnson said
softly. "I can help you work through your anger and panic now that
you have tested positive for AIDS. But when you ask me if I think
that God has brought this on you as a judgment because of your
former lifestyle, I cannot deal with that. You are a Christian and a
member of the church; have you talked with your pastor?
"I don't feel free to do that," John replied. "Several months ago he
said in a sermon that AIDS might be God's way of bringing moral
judgment on the homosexuals. As a Christian and a homosexual, I
am prepared to acknowledge that my lifestyle is a sin against God's
purpose for my life if that would help. But why would God do this
to me? Other people sin and seem to live healthy lives. I know that
you are a Christian counselor, Dr. Johnson. I have prayed and it
doesn't seem to help. I still feel this awful sense of doom-that
even God has abandoned 	me. Can't you help me?"
"Why didn't someone prepare me for this?" Sue Johnson said to
herself as she wrote up her notes following the therapy session
with John. "I can deal with sin in my own life, I think, though I
am not sure how I would feel if I were John. But I don't feel
capable of dealing with the question of sin and forgiveness in
the lives of my clients. Even ifl felt capable, I am not sure that I
should. 	Who am 	I 	to hear 	his 	confession 	and 	grant 	him
absolution? 	I am his counselor, not his priest."
And so we meet Dr. Johnson again, whom we met in chapter
1. And she still has an uneasy conscience! She is, after all, a
Christian who counsels. She also has been taught the concept of
232

-- 233 of 257 --

DYNAMICS OF PASTQRAL CARE IN COUNSELING PRAXIS 	233
the "priesthood 	of all believers." 	But she has never really
connected it with her role as a therapist. Does the promise of
Jesus actually apply to her as well as to her pastor: "Receive the
Holy Spirit. If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven; if
you retain the sins of any, they are retained" Gohn 20:22-23)?
Can Christians who counsel share in the ministry of pastoral
care even when it touches upon the communication of forgive-
ness as part of emotional healing? The thesis of this chapter is
that this indeed is the case. This chapter is intended to give
understanding and encouragement to Sue Johnson and all her
fellow counselors and caregivers who are Christians.
The form of pastoral care I have in mind here is the ministry
of Christ continued through all the members of the church. It
does not belong only to "ordained pastors," as though the larger
body of Christ has no share in this ministry of care. Christ
himself was not "ordained" in the technical sense of holding an
office that entitled him to dispense God's grace and benevo-
lence. Rather, he was a layperson in whom the presence and
Spirit of God were manifest.
This was true as well for the disciples whom he called and to
whom he gave his Spirit after the Resurrection. All who have the
Spirit of Christ continue to have the commission and authority to
do Christ's ministry-which 	is the basis for all forms of pastoral
care. Pastoral care, therefore, can be one form of the ministry of
Christians who practice therapy, whether as ordained ministers
or as professional caregivers. The relation of theological ethics
to pastoral care is, in effect, the relation of God's moral will as
expressed through his redemptive grace to persons caught in the
web of personal 	moral failure and general moral evil. The
problems of sin and evil raise issues in pastoral care that a
theological approach to therapy must address.I
Pastoral 	care 	generally 	provides 	three 	forms of helping
ministry by which persons can realize God's moral will: (1) an
extension of God's grace; (2) a transfer of spiritual power; and
(3) the creation of a healing community.
Pastoral Care as an Extension of God's Grace
The mode: intervention
The goal: forgiveness
The theological dynamic: a kind of absolution

-- 234 of 257 --

234 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
The concept of intervention has its roots in God's gracious
interaction with persons so they may continue to bear his image
and may share his eternal life. By nature, humans are both
creaturely and personal. The personal dimension of human life
is contingent on relation to God, who is the transcendent source
of personal being.
Without intervention into the creaturely process, personhood
would not have come into being. God enters into covenant
relation with persons and as covenant partner aligns himself
with them over and against nature. Sin is a moral and spiritual
problem resulting from defection from the covenant relation.
Sin, defined as defiance of God's gracious relation to those who
bear his image, results in separating persons from the gracious
life of God. The consequences of sin can be related to the moral
and spiritual disorientation that afflictsthe person in this state of
estrangement and alienation.
God's judgment against sin, according to theological ethics, is
itself a continued intervention of divine grace, for if the sinner
were left to the consequences of moral and spiritual disorienta-
tion, personhood 	would disappear 	behind 	the sickness and
turmoil of life. Sin is fatal to personhood because its conse-
quences lead to a fatalistic conclusion of human life.
The consequences of sin are not identical with the judgment
of God on sin, though they may sometimes be coincidental.
God's judgment 	is itself an intervention between 	sin and its
consequence, so that the sinner is now related once more to God
rather than left to suffer the ultimate fate of sin's consequence-
"in the day that you eat of it you will die" (Gen. 2:17). This
death is not itself the divine judgment, but merely the deadly
consequence of sin. Divine judgment called Adam and Eve out
of their fateful situation and called them back again into relation
with the living God. Death and disease cannot be a judgment of
God merely as fate, for his judgment is rooted in his grace and
offers empowerment 	for repentance 	and faith, leading to re-
newal of relation. We cannot tear God's judgment away from the
living God himself and make of this an unrelievable 	fate.
The specific goal of divine grace as intervention is forgive-
ness-the 	renewal of a positive relation between people and
God. Forgiveness means restored relation, not merely granting
an exception 	to a moral law. Thus 	forgiveness restores 	an
authentic moral history of being in relation. Forgiveness is the

-- 235 of 257 --

DYNAMICSOF PASTORALCARE IN COUNSELING PRAXIS 	235
ultimate moral good, which transcends the moral law without
breaking it.
The moral law does not contain the possibility of forgiveness.
Forgiveness is located in the moral good, which is necessarily
personal. The moral good, therefore, must have its source in the
divine intention, which is the same source for the moral law. In
this way forgiveness offers a moral good without contradicting
the moral law, for both have their origin in the same moral
reality and intention of God. This is the specific content of a
theological 	ethic 	with 	regard 	to forgiveness. 	Pastoral care
recognizes the moral law and its criteria for determining what is
right, and it provides moral advocacy through intervention in
order to sustain the moral good. But pastoral care also provides
moral advocacy when one stands in the wrong through the
consequences of sin, and it provides a moral basis for forgive-
ness through the extension of God's grace.
We must take note that the consequence 	of sin may be
perceived at times as identical with a divine judgment, as in the
case of a natural catastrophe, an act of aggression by another, or
even a fatal disease. In certain cases in the Old Testament, the
judgment of God was considered to take the form of a physical
affliction, such as the leprosy that struck Miriam, the sister of
Moses (Num. 12:1-16), or the plague that struck the people of
Israel when they forsook God and worshiped the golden calf
(Exod. 32:35).
These exceptional cases, however, do not provide a case for
separating God's judgment from his grace. In each case God
himself intervenes 	and stands between 	the people 	and the
consequence 	of their 	sin, even 	when 	the 	consequence 	is
considered 	a divine judgment! 	This, 	again, is why divine
judgment cannot be shifted away from its source in God and
located with an impersonal thing such as disease or death.
Pastoral care must, then, prepare to make the same kind of
intervention without being intimidated by the thought that a
person's affliction or situation is the result of God's judgment
against sin. God manifests the moral good of divine grace by
intervening to restore persons, even if the consequences of sin
are seen as divine judgment 	God's judgment may express the
consequences 	of violating a moral law, but God's grace ex-
presses his moral will, which has as its goal the moral good of
forgiveness.2

-- 236 of 257 --

236 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Quite often caregivers will be confronted with a situation in
which a person 	may be considered, 	or consider 	himself 	or
herself, 	suffering the consequences 	of an immoral or sinful
action. The caregiver may feel morally ambivalent if she feels
that moral law and divine judgment 	exhaust God's moral will.
She may instinctively 	want to offer release 	from this moral
judgment, 	but she may be unsure that it is right to do so.
Consider, for example, the dilemma of someone who must
provide care for a patient with AIDS. Some caregivers believe
that this disease may be a punishment of God. They assume that
AIDS 	is contracted 	in most 	cases 	through 	sexual 	contact,
particularly through homosexual relations. If they view homo-
sexuality 	as 	sinful, 	and 	if AIDS 	appears 	to be 	a disease
contracted primarily by homosexuals, then they conclude that
the one who has contracted the disease is experiencing 	God's
judgment 	against sin.
Those who provide caregiving to persons with AIDS may
have theological or moral convictions that prevent them from
intervening 	in a situation where they believe God's judgment
has fallen on the person. However, we have shown that there
are no theological grounds for assuming that disease and sin are
connected in this kind of "cause-and-effect" 	relation. God has
shown himself to be the covenant partner of the person and is
aligned 	with 	persons, 	not with 	nature 	(which includes 	the
possibility of disease) against persons. In the few cases in the
Old Testament 	where 	God appears 	to have brought 	divine
judgment 	in the 	form of a plague 	or a disease, 	he always
graciously intervenes, 	forgiving the people and freeing them
from the consequences 	of sin.
In the New Testament there are no cases cited where God
uses disease as a judgment against sin. On the contrary, Jesus
acted to dispel the notion that sin causes disease, and in every
case he intervened between the disease and the person. Jesus'
response to his disciples' question- 	"Who sinned, this man or
his parents, 	that he was born blind?" -illustrates 	this point
Oohn 9). Like Job's friends, the disciples assumed that suffering
was directly due to sin, and that if the man would only confess
his sin, God would heal him. But Jesus denied 	any causality
between 	sin and the man's blindness. 	This only becomes an
occasion for the works of God to be manifest, Jesus replied-
and he proceeded 	to heal the man.

-- 237 of 257 --

DYNAMICS OF PASTORAL CARE IN COUNSELING PRAXIS 	237
A theological 	ethic 	that 	provides 	moral 	advocacy 	as 	an
extension of God's grace and forgiveness provides intervention
in 	every 	case, 	even 	if one 	believes 	that 	the 	disease 	is a
consequence 	of sin. This position does not have to make the
offer of grace dependent 	on determining 	whether 	or not the
person is experiencing 	the consequences 	of sin. Grace is itself
God's moral intervention 	between 	the person and the conse-
quence 	of sin, even if that consequence 	is viewed 	as divine
judgment.
If we think of intervention 	as an extension of God's grace so
that forgiveness 	becomes 	the moral good, we will have the
courage to offer forgiveness on God's own terms and not merely
out of our human 	instincts 	of pity or compassion.
But, you say, we cannot offer forgiveness until the person who
has wronged God has repented 	and made restitution. 	No, this
kind of thinking is contrary to the moral quality of forgiveness
itself. For if forgiveness were only offered on performance of a
moral 	act 	of contrition, 	then 	God's 	grace 	would 	itself 	be
contingent on a human moral act. In fact, divine forgiveness is
itself the ultimate 	moral act that enables 	the human 	act of
repentance 	and restitution 	to take place. 	Forgiveness 	as an
extension of God's grace does not depend on some prior form of
meeting the demands of the moral law, but is itself the source of
the moral good that produces 	faith and repentance.
The judgment 	of God 	takes 	place 	in 	the 	context 	of his
forgiveness. For his forgiveness is his intervention 	by which he
risks his own moral good again for the sake of restoring persons
to their own moral and spiritual 	good.
Why, then, do we say that this kind of pastoral care is a form of
absolution? 	Because 	absolution 	certifies the moral good that
forgiveness provides. The moral law cannot provide absolution,
for 	it 	cannot 	provide 	forgiveness. 	Only 	God 	can 	provide
absolution, 	for he provides forgiveness as the moral good that
upholds persons in the very moment when they are without a
moral good or moral freedom of their own. The caregiver then
serves as a moral agent, binding the moral good of forgiveness to
the life of the person through 	intervention.
Absolution 	offered 	without 	intervention 	is 	impotent 	and
inoperative. 	Intervention 	that does not intend to grant absolu-
tion ultimately betrays the moral good that forgiveness is meant
to create.

-- 238 of 257 --

238 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Counselors who act as advocates for God do not dispense
forgiveness and grace. Rather, as children of God they authenti-
cate forgiveness and grace through accepting and affirming their
clients. Nor do counselors usurp the liturgical form of confession
and absolution as part of the corporate worship of a congregation
under pastoral leadership. Instead, they authenticate this liturgi-
cal word through the growth process, in which a motive power
to receive forgiveness is released and experienced 	(chap. 3).
Counselors 	do not suddenly 	become 	priests, 	but-as 	Jesus
himself did-they 	offer and authenticate 	the grace that God
gives through their own "real presence." In demonstrating this
divine acceptance they offer a kind of absolution.
John, the man who has tested positive for AIDS, seeks more
than therapeutic 	aid to reduce his anger and anxiety .and to
develop adequate coping mechanisms. He expects Dr. Johnson,
a Christian 	counselor, to help him resolve a spiritual crisis
brought on by his homosexual lifestyle, his sin, and his viewing
AIDS as a judgment 	of God. He has prayed without finding
relief. He is willing to acknowledge his sin, but has not found
forgiveness, for he has been led to believe that his physical
condition is a direct judgment of God. This vacates the reality of
forgiveness and leaves him with a sense of doom and despair.
Dr. Johnson 	needs 	help 	in understanding 	her 	role as a
Christian 	who counsels 	and 	how she can make a positive
intervention in this case, leading her client to experience God's
forgiveness in such a way that he will have God as his advocate
and not his adversary. John is seeking absolution and restoration
through his Christian therapist, though he does not express it in
those terms. The purpose of this chapter is to help Sue Johnson
and others like her to meet this need through an intervention
that becomes a form of pastoral care.
Pastoral Care as a Transfer of Spiritual Power
The mode: advocacy
The goal: liberation
The theological dynamic: a kind of exorcism
As we tum now to the second way in which pastoral care can
be viewed as a helping ministry, we must look more closely at

-- 239 of 257 --

DYNAMICSOF PASTORALCARE IN COUNSELING PRAXIS 	239
how moral advocacy empowers the one who is morally pow-
erless.
In suggesting that pastoral care is a transfer of spiritual power,
we must immediately make a qualification. Transfer does not
mean 	literally transferring 	power from the caregiver to the
client We have already said that, on the one hand, the caregiver
does not possess moral authority or power by virtue of his or her
role. On the other hand, the caregiver is connected to the source
of spiritual and moral power that is the basis of all healing and
personal empowerment. We can look at an incident in the life
and ministry of Jesus as an example.
As Jesus was passing through the crowd, a woman who had an
incurable 	physical ailment desperately 	reached out to touch
him, thinking, "If I touch even his garments, I shall be made
well" (Mark5:28). She was healed immediately. Simultaneously
Jesus felt that "power had gone forth from him"; he turned to
seek her out of the crowd (v. 30). When the woman admitted
that she had touched him, he said to her, "Daughter, your faith
has made you well; go in peace, and be healed of your disease"
(v. 34).
There was, in effect, a transfer of spiritual power. The woman
was in a powerless position. Perhaps she had concluded that her
inability to be healed by the physicians was a sign of God's
judgment on her. Jesus' miracles of healing encouraged her to
believe that there was an available source of power by which
she could be healed. She saw Jesus as a contact with that power
and felt that she had to make only the most tentative touch to
have this power.
The transfer of power was a form of moral advocacy in that
health is a moral good that issues from God, while disease is a
threat to this moral good that renders one powerless. Yet Jesus
did not credit his power with effecting her healing, but her faith!
He exercised his power not merely to liberate her from her
illness, but to empower her by summoning up within her the
spiritual power of faith.
This woman would have to face other kinds of illness and
other forms of evil before her life on earth was over. Liberation
from disease or demons is not an end in itsel£ Rather, the true
end of liberation is the empowerment of persons to stand against
evil with the assurance that they are not cut off from God's moral
and spiritual good.

-- 240 of 257 --

240 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
How does this transfer of spiritual power actually take place
through 	pastoral 	care? 	First, 	the 	caregiver 	brings 	into 	the
desperate 	situation the moral and spiritual authority of God's
person and presence. The caregiver herself enters the void left
by the devastation of evil and fills it with a moral and spiritual
presence that sends a signal to those who are powerless that
there 	is a good which will prevail. The caregiver does this
primarily through her presence, but also, as appropriate, with
words and even touch.
Second, the transfer of spiritual power-which 	empowers the
client to believe in the moral good that is available from God-
occurs 	as the 	client 	shares 	the 	pain 	and 	agony that 	the
devastation has left in its wake. In taking on himself human
suffering, pain, and distress, Jesus empowered the powerless.
There is a kind of inner logic that we must clearly understand:
the suffering of God brings those who suffer into contact with
his divine power and goodness. Through sharing in the suffer-
ings of God, we receive the power of God and thus survive the
onslaughts of evil.
The caregiver reveals the suffering God through identifying
with the pain of human suffering, and she releases the power of
God by bringing God into contact with human weakness and
distress. This is an incarnational kind of caregiving in which the
presence and power of God are displayed, not in religious words
or symbols, but through 	human actions and advocacy. Yes,
prayer, worship, and religious symbols also may express the
presence of God. But the transfer of spiritual power ordinarily
comes through 	the 	nonreligious 	means 	of intervention 	and
liberation. This is what is meant by the incarnational dimension
of moral advocacy.
I have suggested that this form of pastoral care is a kind of
exorcism. Theological 	ethics 	provides 	pastoral 	care 	with 	a
perspective 	on evil that takes mental 	illness 	seriously as a
pathology, but it also becomes the moral advocate of the person
suffering mental and emotional distress from the onslaughts of
evil.
Behind 	the phenomenon 	of the 	New Testament 	and the
ministry ofJ esus that depicts the evil of demonic oppression and
that depicts healing as exorcism lies the positive truth that moral
goodness does not only heal-it 	liberates. God's grace sets up a

-- 241 of 257 --

DYNAMICS OF PASTORAL CARE IN COUNSELING PRAXIS 	241
shield against invading forces and powers seeking to destroy the
moral and spiritual life of persons.
As the self develops, it is vulnerable to forces that have great
power in affecting the personality. Without this vulnerability,
the person would not be susceptible to the power of the good as
a form of personal and spiritual empowerment. However, this
vulnerability also means that we are subject to confusion and
misdirection, which can lead us to yield to the "spirits" that
promise to fulfill our needs, desires, and intentions. Exorcism
thus becomes the transfer of spiritual power, enabling the self to
"cast off' this alien power and open itself again to the formative
powers of moral and spiritual goodness.
Without positive, continual reinforcement 	of the good that
constitutes the spiritual environment for the life of the self, we
would all become "deranged" and subject to the confiicting and
competing forces present in our moral and spiritual environ-
ment.
What appears as an extraordinary event of exorcism, particu-
larly in the presence of Jesus as the personal embodiment of the
moral and spiritual goodness of God himself, points us toward
the ordinary and more routine forms of exorcism as the means
for effectively transferring spiritual power and for liberating
persons from confiicting and competing forces. These forces by
their very nature defy categorization as either "from without" or
"from within." 	The borderline 	between 	mental 	illness 	and
demonic possession is ambiguous and undefinable.
A perspective of pastoral care that reduces all emotional and
mental distress to psycho-somatic disorder casts the person
hopelessly back on himself as ultimately responsible for his own
sickness and healing. By contrast, a perspective of pastoral care
that interprets everything from a headache to psychotic behavior
as demonic possession voids the person of moral and spiritual
identity 	and leaves him or her in an absolutely 	powerless
condition.
Theological ethics respects the ambiguity that conceals the
borderline between 	sin and sickness, between 	mental illness
and the powers of evil. Moral advocacy is quite prepared both to
treat 	and 	to 	rebuke 	disease. 	Treatment 	comes 	under 	the
category of intervention, which applies techniques of medicinal
and therapeutic 	practices to bring healing.
Rebuke as a category of intervention 	shields the affiicted

-- 242 of 257 --

242 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
person with divine grace, saying no to certain forces and powers
and yes to the powers of health and moral goodness.3
We should note that Jesus apparently did not practice an overt
form of exorcism with any of his immediate disciples. Yet he did
confront the forces of evil that sought to torment and confuse
them. This is one way of understanding 	his saying, "Whoever
causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would
be better for him to have a great millstone fastened around his
neck and to be drowned in the depth of the sea" (Matt. 18:6).
Many scholars feel that these "little 	ones" were Jesus' 	own
disciples. Jesus practiced moral advocacy to care for his disci-
ples. He rebuked those who would seek to destroy their relation
to him and warned that there are appropriate uses for millstones
for such evil powers! 	Perhaps 	counselors 	ought to hang a
millstone on their office wall as a visible sign of this warning
against the power of evil.
Jesus even rebuked his disciples when their ideas appeared
off-base. "Get 	behind 	me, 	Satan!" Jesus 	said 	when 	Peter
suggested that it was wrong for him to go up to Jerusalem, where
he would meet almost certain death (Matt. 16:23). In a single
moment Jesus exorcised himself from a thought 	contrary to
God's moral will, and he also exorcised his disciples 	from
allowing such a thought to find a place in their minds and hearts.
Those who undertake the ministry of pastoral care must have
the discernment and the moral sense to create an environment
that clearly defines the kind of power that is evil and destructive
and a kind of power that is good and constructive. From the
perspective of theological ethics, it is not necessary to draw this
boundary 	at the point of demons as against illness. But an
environment 	should be created in which evil from whatever
source and by whatever name is placed outside the horizon of
moral goodness that positively defines the person who is the
object of God's care.
Once again, I am not suggesting that the Christian counselor
assume some kind of role as an "exorcist." Rather, I suggest that
the very presence of a Christian is the "real presence" of Jesus
Christ by his Spirit. In this form of presence lie the authority
and power to affirm a positive and "whole" 	relationship 	and
environment for the client that goes beyond-but 	includes-
therapeutic 	acceptance 	and congruence. 	If "evil" 	manifests
itself, then the counselor will be prepared 	to deal with this

-- 243 of 257 --

DYNAMICS OF PASTORAL CARE IN COUNSELING PRAXIS 	243
••alien" force in straightforward and matter-of-fact affirmation
without questioning 	the source of this apparent "evil." 4
In 	the 	case 	of John, 	the 	counselor 	needs 	to create 	an
environment of support and affirmation that will shield him from
the tormenting insinuations that he has become a victim of his
sin and is alienated from God. This raises serious problems for
the Christian 	therapist 	when John's 	own church and pastor
apparently are not helping and, in fact, may be contributing to
the problem. But this may not be actually the case. Sue Johnson
can at least talk with John's pastor and attempt to create a bridge
for John to find a network of people 	who can provide this
"shield" 	of God's grace and love around him. Christian coun-
selors can often provide a theological praxis by which pastors
can discover new dimensions of pastoral care as a function of the
church as the body of Christ.
Pastoral Care as the Creation of a Healing Community
The mode: affirmation
The goal: peace/shalom
The theological dynamic: a kind of eucharist
A third way in which pastoral care can be viewed as a form of
moral advocacy is in the creation of a healing community. Here
we move more directly into the extension of the grace of God in
the form of the Christian community, which can be seen as the
biblical form of the body of Christ.
Sin produces estrangement 	and alienation from the human
community. The immediate consequence of Adam's sin was an
estrangement between God and human personal life and a form
of alienation between 	human beings. The differentiation that
properly belongs to the structure of human life in the form of the
I-Thou relation has now become division. No longer is the other
affirmed as ''bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh"; now it is
"the woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me fruit
of the tree, and I ate" (Gen. 3:12). No longer will Adam provide
moral advocacy for the woman as he would for his own life.
Instead, when his own being is threatened, 	he betrays her by
blaming her for his moral predicament. Even God is put on trial,
so to speak, by the moral autonomy of Adam-it 	is the "woman
whom thou gavest to be with mel"

-- 244 of 257 --

244 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
The test of true moral advocacy as a dimension of pastoral care
is the willingness to affirm the person who would otherwise be
vulnerable to the demands of the moral law and powerless in
the face of God's judgment on sin. In authentic intervention the
caregiver is willing to stand with the one who lacks status and to
affirm that person as necessary to one's own good. The goal of
moral advocacy is to reunite the one who is estranged to the
community of believers.
Moses, for example, acted as a moral advocate when the
Isarelites rebelled against God and worshiped the golden calf.
Aaron, Moses' brother, gave up his advocacy for the people
when he claimed a kind of moral autonomy to justify himself: "I
threw it [the gold] into the fire, and there came out this calf'
(Exod. 32:24)1
In 	contrast, 	Moses ascended 	the 	mountain 	to 	intervene
between the sin of the people and the dreadful consequences
that had fallen upon them. When God threatened to abandon his
people and start over with Moses, Moses argued as the moral
advocate of the people: "Alas, this people have sinned a great
sin; they have made for themselves gods of gold. But now, if
thou wilt forgive their sin-and 	if not, blot me, I pray thee, out
of thy book which thou hast written" 	(Exod. 32:31-32).
Moses saw that God's stated intention to abandon his people
because of their sin was a test of his knowledge of God's moral
advocacy, which is rooted in covenant 	election. 	In arguing
against the stated intention of God to bring a final and fatal
judgment on the people as a consequence of their sin, Moses
knew that he was arguing out of the moral goodness of God,
which has as its ultimate intention forgiveness and affirmation
rather than judgment and reprobation.
The 	content 	of affirmation is threefold. 	First, 	affirmation
intercepts the consequences of sin and lays claim to the person
who would otherwise 	be alienated 	from all hope 	of moral
goodness. This affirmation also intercepts the demand of the
moral law. Thus the moral law does not destroy the image of
God in human beings, but is directed away from the lawbreaker
to the lawgiver-to 	God who is the creative source of moral
goodness.
One who offers pastoral care thus stands as a moral agent of
this creative redirecting 	of the moral law so that the conse-
quences of sin are not fatal and final. In doing this, that person

-- 245 of 257 --

DYNAMICSOF PASTORALCARE IN COUNSELINGPRAXIS 	245
stands as an agent of God's own moral goodness expressed in
affirming the person as having extreme value to God.
Second, affirmation is the creative ritual that brings the
estranged back into community. When the plague fell on the
people as a direct consequence of their sin and God stated that
he would not reveal his presence to them as he had in the past,
Moses entreated God, " 'Yet thou hast said, "I know you by
name, and you have also found favor in my sight." ... 	Consider
too that this nation is thy people.' And he [God] said, 'My
presence will go with you, and I will give you rest' " (Exod.
33:12-14). Moses then led the people in celebrating their
affirmation of God in a renewal of the covenant and a liturgy of
Sabbath rest (Exod. 35).
Third, affirmation renews life through the offering up of
thanksgiving. In the expression of thanksgiving the circle of
moral advocacy is completed. What began as a movement away
from moral goodness as defined by the moral law is now
completed as a movement of moral goodness itself expressed as
thanksgiving to God as the source of healing and hope.
David often experienced God's moral advocacy. In his psalms
we see affirmation in the repeated refrain of thanksgiving.
Fill me with joy and gladness;
let the bones which thou has broken rejoice.
Create in me a clean heart, 0 God,
and put a new and right spirit within me.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation,
and uphold me with a willing spirit.
0 LoRo, open thou my lips,
and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
(Ps. 51:8, 10, 12, 15)
In thanksgiving the theological dynamic of pastoral care
becomes a kind of eucharist. At his last supper with his
disciples, Jesus added to his words of affirmation- "I have
called you friends" Oohn 15:15)-the 	ritual of giving thanks.
At this point pastoral care breaks out of the narrovr confines of
the therapeutic and clinical dimension and enters into the
creative and healing community, which has at its center the
eucharistic celebration of peace, God's shalom.
Here we see that pastoral care not only is an extension of the

-- 246 of 257 --

246 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
healing community, which provides the spiritual and moral
resources for the kind of moral advocacy required, but also leads
back into the very center of the community, where there is a
"new and right spirit" expressed in eucharistic celebration. 5
This is not an attempt to design a particular form of ecclesias-
tical ritual, but it is an argument for the theological necessity of a
eucharistic experience that affirms a person's value to God. No
person can see directly the moral goodness of God, as Moses
learned when he requested such an experience (Exod. 33: 18).
We can, however, as Moses did, indirectly experience God's
moral goodness.
The final and, therefore, the continual act of pastoral care is to
experience God's moral goodness as constituting one's personal
value and one's share in God's glory. We are not like Moses,
who had to veil his face so that the people would not see the
fading away of the glory of God in it. Rather, we are ministers of
the new covenant in the Spirit. "And we all, with unveiled face,
beholding the glory of the Lord, are being changed into his
likeness from one degree of glory to another; for this comes from
the Lord who is the Spirit" (2 Cor. 3:18).
It is the privilege of us who give pastoral care to see indirectly
the very glory of the moral goodness of God in the face and life
of those for whom we are moral advocates.
It is time to take the veils off and walk straight into the places
where 	death, 	disease, 	and 	defeat 	have twisted 	life out of
shape-for 	in those places we will find the glory of God.
Notes
1. Donald Capps, professor of pastoral theology at Princeton
Theological Seminary, provides a helpful overview of the various
approaches to pastoral care, including an emphasis on the multiplicity
of biblical approaches, in Biblical Approacl.es to Pastoral Care
(Philadelphia: Westminster, 1981). See also his later book, Life Cycle
Tlaeory and Pastoral Care (Philadelphia: Fortress, 1983).
2. Roger Hording suggests quite strongly that counseling from a
Christian perspective includes a ministry of reconciliation, which
entails what I have called advocacy. "However we understand the
compass of God's restoring work in Christ, the perspective of reconciU-
ation is a crucial one in clarifying the aims of counselling. First and
foremost, the 'ministry of reconciliation' is one in which God takes the
initiative, 'reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting
men's sins against them• (2 Corinthians 5:17-21) .... 	Again, at certain

-- 247 of 257 --

DYNAMICS OF PASTORAL CARE IN COUNSELING PRAXIS 	247
points in counselling we may be privileged to see the wonder of this
most radical of transferences dawn on the person we try to help" (The
Tree of Healing [Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1988], 396-97).
3. In her doctoral dissertation at the Fuller Seminary Graduate
School of Psychology, Marguerite Schuster attempts to explain the
phenomenon 	of demonic power with respect to mental illness and
emotional problems; see Power, Pathology, Paradox: The Dynamics of
Evil and Good (Grand Rapids: Zondervan/Academie, 1987). Her basic
argument is that openness to the phenomenon of demonic possession is
grounded in the very nature of the self and thus should be taken into
account in dealing with emotional and spiritual problems. Unfortu-
nately, in my judgment, she attempts to prove too much. She views the
human self as basically without any spiritual or moral power of its own.
The self either will be controlled from without by the good Spirit and
purpose of God, or by the evil and malicious purpose of Satan. As a
result, she comes very close to identifying all forms of suffering with
some form of "possession" by an evil spirit or spirits. It is understand-
able, then, that she should take a quite negative view of psychotherapy
in favor of a form of pastoral care that treats most psychological
problems as a spiritual power conflict. The failure of the book is as
much in the inadequate theological anthropology used as the basis, as it
is in the rejection of appropriate psychotherapeutic 	strategies.
4. For a discussion of the place of exorcism in the context of therapy,
see the helpful discussion of a case in Samuel Southard, Theology and
Therapy (Dallas: Word, 1989), 248-54. Southard comments on the case
of a woman freed from a demonic power through a psychiatrist working
with an Episcopal priest as a member of the team. Following her
release from this power, this woman found a place of belonging and
acceptance in a church where she said, "I wanted to be in a place
where I was accepted and I wanted to help others who were all bound
up as I was" (253).
5. Wolfhart Pannenberg, in his book Christian Spirituality 	and
Sacramental Community 	(London: Dartman, Longman and Todd,
1983), offers the concept of"eucharistic spirituality" as an alternative to
a concept of spirituality based on a constant and pervasive sense of sin.
From a Greek Orthodox perspective, John Zizioulas develops a model
of personhood as grounded in the body of Christ as a community
centered on eucharistic life (Being as Communion: Studies in Person-
hood and the Church [Crestwood, N.J.: St. Vladmir's Seminary Press,
1985]).

-- 248 of 257 --

Bibliography
Adams, Jay E. The Christian Counselors Manual.1913. Reprint. Grand
Rapids: Zondervan, 1986.
___ 	Competent to Counsel. 1970. Reprint. Grand Rapids: Zonder-
van, 1986.
___ 	More Than Redemption: A Theology of Christian Counseling.
Grand Rapids: Baker, 1979.
Aden, Leroy, and David G. Benner, eds. Counseling and the Human
Predicament: A Study of Sin, Guilt and Forgiveness. Grand Rapids:
Baker, 1989.
Anderson, Ray S. "Christopraxis: Competence 	as a Criterion for
Theological Education." Theological Student's Fellowship Bulletin
Oanuary-February 	1984): 10-13.
___ 	"Clergy Burnout as a Symptom of Theological Anemia."
Theology, News and Notes (March 1984): 11-14. Fuller Theological
Seminary, Pasadena, California.
___ 	"Conversion: Essence of the Christian Story.'' Theology,
News and Notes Oune 1986): 8-12. Fuller Theological Seminary,
Pasadena, California.
___ 	Minding God's Business. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1986.
___ 	On Being Human. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1982.
___ 	"The Resurrection of Jesus as Hermeneutical Criterion: A
Case for Sexual Parity in Ministry." Theological Student's Fellow-
ship Bulletin (March-April 1986): 9-15.
--- 	Theological Foundations for Ministry. Grand Rapids: Eerd-
mans, 1979.
Anderson, Ray S., and Dennis B. Guernsey. On Being Family: A Social
Theology of the Family. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1985.
Balint, Michael. The Doctor, His Patient and the Illness. Marshfield,
Md.: Pitman, 1957.
Barrett, C. K. Church, Ministry, and Sacraments in the New Testament.
Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1985.
Barth, Karl.Church Dogmatics, vol. 4, pt. 2. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark,
1961.
___ 	Ethics. New York: Seabury, 1981.
248

-- 249 of 257 --

BIBLIOGRAPHY 	249
Becker, Walter. "Healing and Spiritual Disciplines." Journal of Chris-
tian Healing 6, no. 2 (Fall 1984): 35-40.
Benner, David G. Psychotherapy and the Spiritual Quest. Grand
Rapids: Baker, 1988.
--~ 	ed. Christian Counseling and Psychotherapy. Grand Rapids:
Baker, 1987.
--~ 	ed. Psychotherapy in Christian Perspective. Grand Rapids:
Baker, 1987.
Bergen, Allen. "Psychotherapy and Religious Values." In Wholeness
and Holiness: Readings in the Psychology/Theology of Mental
Health, edited by H. Newton Malony. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983.
Berne, Eric. Transactional Analysis 	in Psychotherapy. New York:
Grove Press, 1961.
Bledstein, B. J. The Culture of Professionalism: The Middle Class and
Development of Higher Education in America. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1973.
Bloesch, Donald. The Struggle of Prayer. Colorado Springs: Helmers
and Howard, 1988.
Bonhoeffer, Dietrich. Ethics. New York: Macmillan, 1955.
___ 	Letters and Papers from Prison, enlarged ed. New York:
Macmillan, 1972.
Bradshaw, John. Bradshaw On: Healing the Shame That Binds You.
Deerfield Beach, Fla.: Health Communications, 	1988.
Bromiley, Geoffrey. God and Marriage. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1980.
Brown, Colin, ed. The New International Dictionary of New Testament
Theology. 4 vols. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1975-76.
Buhler, Charlotte. Values in Psychotherapy. New York: Free Press,
1962.
Capps, Donald. Biblical Approaches to Pastoral Care. Philadephia:
Weshninster, 	1981.
___ 	Life Cycle Theory and Pastoral Care. Philadelphia: Fortress,
1983.
Carroll, 	Mary Ann, et al. Ethics 	in the Practice of Psychology.
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 	1985. 	·
Carter, John D., and Bruce Narramore. The Integration of Psychology
and Theology: An Introduction. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1979.
Clebsch, William A., and Charles R. Kaekle. Pastoral Care in Historical
Perspective. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 	1964.
Clinebell, 	Howard. Basic Types of Pastoral Care and Counseling.
London: SCM Press, 1984.
Collins, Gary R. Christian Counseling: A Comprehensive Guide. Rev.
ed. Dallas: Word, 1988.

-- 250 of 257 --

250 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
___ 	Psychology and Theology: Prospects for Integration. Nash-
ville: Abingdon, 1981.
___ 	The Rebuilding of Psychology: An Integration of Psychology
and Christianity. Wheaton, Ill.: Tyndale House, 1977.
___ 	ed. Helping People Grow. Ventura, Calif.: Vision House,
1980.
Corey, Gerald. "Ethical Issues in Counseling and Psychotherapy." In
Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy, edited by
Gerald Corey. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth, 1977.
Dire, Jeffrey M. "Rational-Emotive Therapy: Implications for Pastoral
Counseling." D.Min. diss., Fuller Theological Seminary, 1984.
Dueck, Alvin. "Ethical Contexts of Healing: Peoplehood and Right-
eousness." Pastoral Psychology 35, no. 4 (Summer 1987): 239-53.
___ 	"Ethical Contexts of Healing: Ecclesia and Praxis." Pastoral
Psychology 36, no. 1 (Fall 1987): 49-62.
Dunn, Frank G. Building Faith in Families: Using the Sacraments in
Pastoral Ministry. Wilton, Conn.: Morehouse-Barlow, 1986.
Ebeling, Gerhard. Word and Faith. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1963.
Ellul, Jacques. Prayer and the Modem Man. New York: Seabury, 1979.
Evans, C. Stephen. Wisdom and Humanness in Psychology: Prospects
for a Christian Approach. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1989.
Farnsworth, Kirk. Wholehearted Integration: Harmonizing Psychology
and Christianity Through Word and Deed. Grand Rapids: Baker,
1985.
Finch, John G. Intensive Therapy and the Three Ways. Pasadena:
Integration Press, 1989.
Firet, Jacob. Dynamics in Pastoring (Het agogisch Moment in het
pastoraal Optreden), translated by John Vriend. (Uitgeversmaat-
schappij J. H. Kok-Kampen, 1982); Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1986.
Fleck, J. R., and John D. Carter, eds. Psychology and Christianity:
Integration Readings. Nashville: Abingdon, 1981.
Frankl, Viktor. The Doctor and the Soul: From Psychotherapy to
Logotherapy. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1955.
___ 	Man's Search For Meaning: An Introduction to Logotherapy.
Boston: Beacon Press, 1959.
___ 	The Unconscious God: Psychotherapy and Theology. Lon-
don: Hodder and Stoughton, 1977.
Freidson, E. The Professionals and Their Prospects. Beverly Hills,
Calif.: Sage, 1973.
Gerkin, Charles. The Living Human Document: Re-Visioning Pastoral
Counseling in a Hermeneutical Mode. Nashville: Abingdon, 1984.
Gilbert, Marvin G., and Raymond T. Brock, eds. The Holy Spirit and
Counseling: Theology and Theory. Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson,
1985.

-- 251 of 257 --

BIBLIOGRAPHY 	251
Good, P., and D. Kraybill. Perils of Professionalism. Scottdale, Pa.:
Herald Press, 1982.
Goode, William J. "Community Within a Community: The Profes-
sions." American Sociological Review 22 (1957): 194-200.
Gustafson, James. "Christian 	Ethics." 	In Religion, edited 	by Paul
Ramsey. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 	1965.
Halleck, S. L. The Politics of Therapy. New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
Hansen, James C., ed. Ethics, Legalities and the Family Therapist.
Rockville, Md.: Aspen Publications, 1982.
Hauerwas, Stanley. A Community of Character: Toward a Construc-
tive Christian Social Ethic. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame
Press, 1981.
Hiltner, Seward. "Salvation's Message About Health." In Wholeness
and Holiness: Readings in the Psychology/Theology of Mental
Health, edited by H. Newton Malony. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983.
___ 	Theological Dynamics. Nashville: Abingdon, 1972.
Holifield, E. Brooks. A History of Pastoral Care in America: From
Salvation to SelfRealization. 	Nashville: Abingdon, 1983.
Hoffman, John. Ethical Confrontation in Counseling. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1979.
Hording, Roger F. The Tree of Healing: Psychological and Biblical
Foundations for 	Counseling and Pastoral Care. Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 	1988. Original ed., Roots and Shoots: A Guide to
Counseling and Psychotherapy. London: Hodder and Stoughton,
1985.
Jones, Stanton L., ed. Psychology and the Christian Faith: An Intro-
ductory Reader. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1986.
Kierkegaard, Sf/lren.The Journals of Kierkegaard, translated and edited
by Alexander Dru. New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1958.
___ 	Purity of Heart is to Will One Thing. New York: Harper &
Row, 1956.
Koteskey, Ronald L. Psychology From a Christian Perspective. Nash-
ville: Abingdon, 1980.
Kraus, C. Norman. Jesus Christ Our Lord: Christology from a Disci-
ple's Perspective. Scottdale, Pa.: Herald Press, 1987.
Lake, Frank. Clinical Theology: A Theological and Psychological Basis
to Clinical Pastoral Care. New York: Crossroad, 1987.
Larson, M. S. The Rise of Professionalism: A Sociological Analysis.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977.
Larzelere, 	R. E. "The 	Task Ahead: Six Levels of Integration 	of
Christianity and Psychology." Journal of Psychology and Theology 8
(1980): 3-11.
Lebacqz, 	K. Professional Ethics: Power and Paradox. Nashville:
Abingdon, 1985.

-- 252 of 257 --

252 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Lee, Cameron. "The Good-Enough 	Family." Journal of Psychology
and Theology 13, no. 3 (1985): 182-89.
London, Perry. Modes and Morals of Psychotherapy. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, 1964.
Lowe, Marshall C. Value Orientation in Counseling and Psychother-
apy. 2d ed. Cranston, R.I.: Carroll Press, 1976.
Macmurray, John. Persons in Relation. London: Faber and Faber, 1961.
___ 	Reason and Emotion. London: Faber and Faber, 1935.
Malony, H. Newton, ed. Wholeness and Holiness: Readings in the
Psychology/Theology of Mental Health. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1983.
Meissner, W. W. Life and Faith: Psychological Perspectives on Reli-
gious Experience. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press,
1987.
Miskotte, Komelis. When the Gods Are Silent. London: Collins, 1967.
Moltmann, Jurgen. God in Creation: A New Theology of Creation and
the Spirit of God. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1985.
___ 	The Crucified God. New York: Harper & Row, 1974.
Moore, Robert L., ed. Carl Jung and Christian Spirituality. Dallas:
Word, 1988.
Mowrer, 0. Hobart. The Crisis of Psychiatry and Religion. Princeton,
N.J.: Van Nostrand, 1961.
Ogden, Greg. The New Reformation: Returning the Ministry to the
People of God. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 	1990.
Osterbaus, James P. Counseling Families: From Insight to Interoen-
tion. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 	1989.
Pannenberg, 	Wolfhart. Christian Spirituality and Sacramental Com-
munity. London: Dartman, Longman and Todd, 1983.
Pedersen, John. Israel: Its Life and Culture. Vol. 1. London: Oxford
University Press, 1973.
Perls, Frederick (Fritz), and Laura Perls. The Gestalt Approach and
Eye Witness to Therapy. New York: Bantam, 1976..
Peterson, Eugene. Five Smooth Stones for Pastoral Work. Atlanta: John
Knox, 1980.
Peterson, J. Counseling and Values. Scranton, Pa.: International Text-
book, 1970.
Philipchalk, Ronald P. Psychology and Christianity: An Introduction
to Controversial Issues. Rev. ed. Lanham, Md.: University Press of
America, 1988.
Polanyi, Michael. Personal Knowledge. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1958.
Pruyser, Paul. The Minister as Diagnostician. Philadelphia: Westmin-
ster, 1976.
Rodiger, Georgiana G. The Miracle of Therapy: A Layperson's Guide to
the Mysteries of Christian Psychology. Dallas: Word, 1989.

-- 253 of 257 --

BIBLIOGRAPHY 	253
Rogers, Carl. 	Counseling and Psychotherapy. Boston: 	Houghton
Mifflin, 1942.
Roszak, 	Theodore. 	Person/Planet. Garden 	City, 	N.Y.: Double-
day/Anchor, 1979.
Sandford, John, and Paula Sandford. The Transformation of the Inner
Man. South Plainfield, N.J.: Bridge Publishing, 1982.
Schaffer, Peter. Equus. New York: Avon, 1974.
Schuster, Marguerite. Power, Pathology, Paradox: The Dynamics of
Evil and Good. Grand Rapids: Zondervan/Academie, 1987.
Simcox, Carroll E. "On Being Both Christian and Religious." Christian
Century (18 April 1984): 398-400.
Smedes, Lewis. Caring and Commitment: Leaming to Live the Love
We Promised. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1988.
___ 	Choices: Making Right Decisions in a Complex World. San
Francisco: Harper & Row, 1986.
___ 	Mere Morality. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1983.
Southard, Samuel. Theology and Therapy: The Wisdom of God in a
Context of Friendship. Dallas: Word, 1989.
Thielicke, Helmut 	Being Human ... 	Becoming Human. New York:
Doubleday, 1984.
Theological Ethics: Foundations. Vol. 1. Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1979.
Torrance, Thomas. God and Rationality. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1971.
Tournier, Paul. The Meaning of Persons. London: SCM Press, 1957.
Tweedie, 	Donald F., Jr. Logotherapy: An Evaluation of Frankl's
Existential Approach to Psychotherapy. Grand Rapids: Baker, 1961.
Van Leeuwen, Mary S. The Sorcerer's Apprentice: A Christian Look at
the Changing Face of Psychology. Downers Grove, Ill.: Inter-Varsity,
1982.
Von Balthasar, Hans Urs. A Theological Anthropology. New York:
Sheed and Ward, 1967.
Weber, Otto. Foundations of Dogmatics. Vol. 2. Grand Rapids: Eerd-
mans, 1983.
Wicker, Allen. Introduction 	to Ecological Psychology. Monterey,
Calif.: Brooks-Cole, 1979.
Winnicott, Donald W. The Maturational Processes and the Facilitating
Environment. New York: International Universities Press, 1965.
Yoell, W., et al. "Marriage, Morals and Therapeutic Goals: A Discus-
sion." Journal of Behavioral Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry 2
(1971): 127-32.
Zizioulas, John. Being as Communion: Studies in Personhood and the
Church. Crestwood, N.J.: St Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1985.

-- 254 of 257 --

Index
Absolution, 117-18, 237-38
Adam, 17-19, 21-22, 35-36, 74, 177,
234, 243-44
Adams, Jay, 28n, 52n
Adler, Alfred, 102n
Agogic Moment, 66-67, 130-31, 157-
58, 185
AIDS, 30-31, 45, 50, 236, 238
Allport, Gordon, 102n, 163, 174, 194n
Anthropology, biblical, 25
Aristotle, 97
Atonement, 112-13, 119n
Balint, Michael, 75n
Baptism, 98, 179-80
Barrett, C. K., 194n
Barth, Karl, 116, 126, 215
Becker, Walter, 111
Benner, David, 9n
Bergen, Allen, 58
Berne, Eric, 189
Bible, 124, 128, 130-33, 216-17;
used for counseling, 35, 122-33,
217-19
Biblical counseling, 36-37
Bledstein, B. J., 213n
Bloesch, Donald, 136-37
Bonhoeffer, Diebich, 143, 166, 189,
228, 231n
Bradshaw, John, 55n
Brock, Raymond, 53n
Bromiley, Geoffrey, 125
Brown, Colin, 101n, 120n
Buhler, Charlotte, 230n
Calling of God, 160-68; and occupa-
tion, 169- 73
Calvin, John, 128
Capps, Donald, 246n
Caregivers, 22, 229, 239-40
Caregiving, 22-23, 56, 222-23
Carroll, Mary Ann, 230n
Carter, John, 9n
Change, openness to, 63-64
Church, 23-24, 99, 181-84, 209
Clebsch, William A., 23
Clinebell, Howard, 59
Clinical theology, 54n
Codependency, 83
Co-humanity, 21, 34, 216
Collins, Gary, 9n, 52n
Community, 92-94, 96-100, 243-46
Competence, 17-18, 20-21, 23-24
Conscience, uneasy, 13-14, 27
Conversion, 45-46, 115-18, 158
Corey, Gerald, 230n
Counseling, 7-8, 14-15, 25-27, 47,
84, 208, 233; as calling, 157-74;
as encounter, 186-88; incarnation-
al, 185-93; as ministry, 25, 176-
93; as occupation, 168- 73; para-pa-
rochial, 181-83; as profession,
188-89; professional practice, 195-
212
Counselors, 22, 93, 97-98, 117-18,
190-91; agents of redemption, 90,
94; agents in therapy, 69- 72, 107,
159; and Christ, 242; growth pro-
moters, 56-75; lay, 22, 25; moral
advocates, 214-30; in private prac-
tice, 95-96, 125, 197; professional,
95, 162, 184; role of, 57, 62, 72,
197
Culture and therapy, 82-83
Cure of souls, 23
Covenant relations, 234-36
Death, 234
Demonic possession, 241-42
Devotion, 167-68
Dilthey, W., 102n
Dire, Jeffrey, 154n
Disease, 234-36, 239, 241
Divorce, 90
Dueck, Alvin, 82, 96, 101n, 197, 203,
206
Dunn, Frank, 194n
Duty, 166, 170
Dysfunction, 20n, 33, 104-5
Ebeling, Gerhard, 135n
Ecological matrix, 39-40, 62, 96-97
Ecology of self, 32-33, 38-42
Ego psychology, 109-10
Ellis, Albert, 149
Ellul, Jacques, 137-42
Emotions, 123, 148-49
Erickson, Erik, 108
Eschatology: of moral responsibility,
218; of self, 49-50
Ethics, theological, 215-16, 218, 226,
228, 233, 237, 241
Evangelism: and counseling, 193
Evans, C. Stephen, 9n, 101n
Eve, 18, 21, 177, 234
Evil, 240-42, 247n
254

-- 255 of 257 --

INDEX 	255
Eysenck, H. J., 57
Exorcism, 241-43, 247n
Fairburn, W. Ronald, 54n
Faith, 27, 132, 189
Farnsworth, Kirk, 9n, 26, 28n, 95, 187
Firet, Jacob, 66-71, 104, 107-8, 126-
28, 130, 134n, 159, 163
Fleck, J. R., 9n
Forgiveness, 47, 232, 234-35, 237
Frankl, Viktor, 64, 106, 187, 190, 194n
Freidson, E., 213n
Fromm, Erich, 102n
Gerkin, Charles, 39, 46, 49, 53n, 54n,
55n, 76n
Gestalt, 17-18, 20, 24, 27, 32, 43, 48;
therapy, 28n
Gilbert, Marvin, 53n
Glasser, William, 96
God, 20, 147, 151, 159, 219, 223, 234,
240; judgment, 234-36; moral free-
dom, 219; moral will, 218, 223;
righteousness of, 91-96; as thera-
pist, 21-22; will of, 138, 141, 171,
228
God-talk, 24, 119n, 139
Goldstein, Kurt, 101n
Good, P., 213n
Goode, William, 199
Grace, 16-17, 44, 107, 108-9; and
conversion, 115-116; and spiritual
growth, 109, 191-92; as reconcilia-
tion, 111-14; as therapeutic inter-
vention, 103-18, 234-35
Growth, 19, 21; goals, 172- 73; integra-
tive, 61-62; motive power for, 64-
69; as sign of health, 58-64
Growth process, 67-69, 72, 104, 105-
10, 172, 185
Growth therapy, 59
Guntrip, Harry, 54n
Gustafson, James, 216-17
Halleck, S. L., 81
Hansen, James C., 230n
Hauerwas, Stanley, 48, 91, 201
Healing, 15, 16, 21-22, 145-49
Health, 33, 42, 58, 60
Hermeneutical task, 44-47, 210
Hermeneutic moment, 66, 130-33
Hiltner, Seward, 53n, 126-27
Hoffman, John, 230n
Holifield, Brooks, 97-98
Holiness and wholeness, 52n, 78n
Holmes, Oliver W., 227
Holy Spirit, 89, 113-14, 116, 178-79,
212, 226-27
Homosexuality, 236, 238
Hope, 100
Homey, Karen, 102n
Humanity, 17, 18, 72
Hurding, Roger, 7, 23, 52n, 53n, 57,
102n, 246n
Identity, 161-62; core of, 64, 104-5;
embodied in community, 97-99;
spiritual, 108
Image of God, 18, 20, 24, 27, 32-35,
38, 73-74, 107,244
Incarnation: as counseling approach,
187-88, 240; and prayer, 142
Inner healing, 145
Integration, 7-8, 19-20, 25-26, 28n,
111
Integrative core of personhood, 31-32,
38
Integrative counseling, 13-28
Integrative task, 23, 32
Intimacy, 63
Jaekle, Charles R., 23
Jesus Christ, 24, 26, 45-47, 50, 81-
82, 126, 142, 192, 225; and king-
dom of God, 85-86; ministry of,
178-79, 239-40; as moral advo-
cate, 225, 242; as paraclete, 177-
78
Jones, Stanton L., 9n
Keller, Helen, 110
Kierkegaard, Siaren, 21, 28, 167, 169-
73, 174n, 175n
Kingdom of God, 18, 81-100, 200,
203-7
Klein, Melanie, 54n, 73
Koteskey, Ronald L., 9n
Kraus, C. Norman, 47, 55n
Kraybill, D., 213n
Lake, Frank, 54n
Larson, M. S., 213n
Larzelere, R. E., 9n
Lebacqz, K., 213n
Lee, Cameron, 174n
Lewin, Kurt, 102n
Life continuum, 32, 43-44, 48, 190
Logotherapy, 106, 190
London, Perry, 214
Love, motive power of, 73- 74, 110
Lowe, Marshall, C., 230n
Macmurray, John, 148, 164
Malony, H. Newton, 52n, 59-61,
119n, 120n
Marriage, 220-21, 223-225
Maslow, Abraham, 73
Maturity, 20, 88-89, 90-91
May, Rollo, 73
Meditation, 152
Meissner, William, 53n, 108-9
Mental illness, 240-42

-- 256 of 257 --

256 	CHRISTIANS WHO COUNSEL
Ministry, 25-26, 177-80
Miskotte, Komelis, 129
Moltmann, Jiirgen, 28n, 113
Moral: advocacy, 222-29; decisions,
220-21, 223-24; dilemmas, 222-
23; freedom, 90, 217; good, 235;
issues in therapy, 215-21
Moral theology, 216-21
Moral vision, 91-92, 95, 201-2
Moses, as moral advocate, 244-45
Motives, 163-66
Mowrer, 0. Hobart, 109, 119n
Narramore, Bruce, 9n
Nurture, 67
Nouthetic counseling, 52n
Object relations therapy, 37, 46, 54n
Ogden, Greg, 194n
Pannenberg, Wolfhart, 98, 247n
Paolino, Thomas, 42
Pastoral care, 23-24, 129, 209, 222,
229, 233; in healing community,
243-46; dynamics of, 232-46; ex-
tension of grace, 233-38; and spir-
itual power, 238-43
Pathology, 21, 40, 48, 64, 240
Pedersen, John, 146, 149
Penitential piety, 98
Perls, Frederick and Laura, 28n
Personage, 70, 162
Persons, 27, 36
Peterson, Eugene, 7
Peterson, J., 230n
Philipchalk, Ronald P., 9n
Polanyi, Michael, 98
Prayer, 14, 16, 139-41; as deliver-
ance, 142-43; healing praxis, 145-
53; as making history, 141-42;
role in therapy, 136-53; shared
life, 137-39
Praxis, 87-88, 110, 137, 146
Professional associations, 199-203,
207-8
Pruyser, Paul, 7
Psychologists, Christian, 15, 24
Psychology: biblical, 65-66; Christian,
16, 32, 41, 52n
Psychotherapeutic techniques, 27
Psychotherapy, 35, 57, 64, 106, 214-
17, 247n
Redemption, as therapeutic interven-
tion, 36, 47
Rogers, Carl, 59, 102n
Roszak, Theodore, 51, 56-57, 74
Salvation, 44, 76n, 115-16
Sanctification, 114
Sandford, John and Paula, 145
Sargin, T. R., 59
Schuster, Marguerite, 247n
Scripture, 26
Self, 17, 19-20; ecology of, 38-42;
identity, 34, 48; socialization, 48-
49; spheres, 39-40; spiritual, 34-
35; systemic, 33-34
Self deception, 111
Self esteem, 41-42, 140-141
Self formation, 44-45
Selfhood, gestalt of, 24
Shaffer, Peter, 43
Shalom, 245
Shame, 31, 47
Simcox, Carroll, 111
Sin, 16, 25, 33, 47, 98, 107, 109, 116,
119n, 147,232, 234-36, 243-44
Skinner, B. F., 73
Smedes, Lewis, 214
Soul, 38-39, 65
Southard, Samuel, 86, 101n, 247n
Spirit, human, 65
Spirit of God, 24, 74
Spiritual power, 238-43
Spranger, Edward, 101n
Stem, W., 102n
Therapeutic bond, 21, 27
Therapeutic continuum, 22-25, 27
Therapeutic gain, 26, 31, 37, 59, 66,
82, 100, 104-5, 191
Therapeutic insight, 68
Therapeutic intervention, 57, 71-72,
81, 107-8, 215-21, 234-35
Therapeutic methods, 23-24, 41-42
Therapists, Christian, 17, 152, 210-12
Therapy, 7; and culture, 82; ethical
core, 197; moral issues, 215-17;
professional, 25, 197-98, 199-203;
value-free, 215; values, 230n
Thielicke, Helmut, 65, 192, 226
Torrance, Thomas F., 138
Tournier, Paul, 70, 162
Tweedie, Donald, 76n
Urs von Balthasar, Hans, 76n
Van Leeuwen, Mary S., 10n
Weber, Otto, 110, 112-13, 119n
Wicker, Allen, 38
Winnicott, D. W., 46, 174n
Wisdom, 86-91
Word of God, as empowerment for
change, 121-33
Yeomans, Martin, 54n
Yoell, W., 230n
Zizioulas, John, 247n

-- 257 of 257 --

