

-- 1 of 236 --



-- 2 of 236 --



-- 3 of 236 --



-- 4 of 236 --



-- 5 of 236 --

© 2022 by Kutter Callaway and William B. Whitney
Published by Baker Academic
a division of Baker Publishing Group
PO Box 6287, Grand Rapids, MI 49516-6287
www.bakeracademic.com
Ebook edition created 2022
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—for example,
electronic, photocopy, recording—without the prior written permission of the
publisher. The only exception is brief quotations in printed reviews.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file at the Library of
Congress, Washington, DC.
ISBN 978-1-4934-3470-1
Unless otherwise indicated, quotations are from the NET Bible® copyright
©1996, 2019 by Biblical Studies Press, L.L.C. http://netbible.com. All rights
reserved.
Scripture quotations labeled KJV are from the King James Version of the Bible.
Scripture quotations labeled NIV are from THE HOLY BIBLE, NEW
INTERNATIONAL VERSION®, NIV® Copyright © 1973, 1978, 1984, 2011 by
Biblica, Inc.® Used by permission. All rights reserved worldwide.
Scripture quotations labeled NRSV are from the New Revised Standard Version
of the Bible, copyright © 1989 National Council of the Churches of Christ in
the United States of America. Used by permission. All rights reserved.
Scripture quotations labeled RSV are from the Revised Standard Version of the
Bible, copyright 1946, 1952 [2nd edition, 1971] National Council of the
Churches of Christ in the United States of America. Used by permission. All
rights reserved worldwide.
Baker Publishing Group publications use paper produced from sustainable
forestry practices and post-consumer waste whenever possible.

-- 6 of 236 --

To the students, mentors, and colleagues
who continue to teach us and remain steadfast in loving
and walking beside us as we continue to learn

-- 7 of 236 --

Contents
Cover
Half Title Page i
Title Page iii
Copyright Page iv
Dedication v
Introduction 1
Part 1: What It Means to “Do” Theology and Why It
Matters for Psychologists 19
1. How to Do Constructive Theology 21
2. Creation as a Trinitarian Project 47
3. God’s Wider Presence 71
4. Christology, Incarnation, and the Imago Dei 95
Part 2: The Psychologist as Theologian 123
5. Research Psychology as Experimental Theology 125
6. Clinical Psychology as Practical Theology 149
7. Psychology as Contextual Theology 175
Conclusion 195
Acknowledgments 203
Index 207
Back Cover 214

-- 8 of 236 --

Introduction
Key takeaways from this introduction:
You are already a theologian.
Theology is a spiritually formative practice; it is something you do.
All that you do takes place in the presence of God.
All theology is contextual and develops over time.
As with so much of life, everything we really need to know can be
found in Pixar films. In
Toy Story, the now classic movie that started
the entire franchise, Buzz Lightyear lands in the middle of Andy’s
room, much to the surprise (and chagrin) of all the other toys. Rex,
the neurotic tyrannosaur, is one of the first to approach the
otherworldly intruder with a question that might strike some as
obvious but is quite telling given the circumstances: “What does a
space ranger actually do?”1
Theologians are not nearly as cool as space rangers, but for many
they are as mysterious and misunderstood as the laser-shooting,
karate-chop-action Buzz Lightyear who suddenly appears in the
middle of an already full toy bin. For many, it is not entirely clear
what exactly it means to be a theologian, much less what the
requirements are for someone who takes up the mantle of
“theologian” as part of their personal or professional identity. In
other words, when it comes to this thing called “theology,” some
form of the question that Rex asks Buzz always seems to be on the
tip of everyone’s tongue: What does a theologian actually do?
This book attempts to answer that question not so much for the
inquisitive plastic dinosaurs in our midst but first and foremost for

-- 9 of 236 --

students of psychology. Its primary goal is to invite burgeoning
psychologists (undergraduate students in particular but grad
students and educators as well) to consider what it means to be a
theologian and what it looks like to do theology as a psychologist.
On the most basic level, it simply outlines some of the key terms and
concepts necessary for engaging in theologically informed
psychology. On another level, though, it explores how to move from
Scripture and the Christian tradition to the practice of psychology
(and vice versa) in ways that are both faithful and robust. In doing
so, it dares to suggest that psychologists—whether students,
researchers, educators, or clinicians—are always already doing
theology. As a result, they are, in fact, already theologians.
However, what will become clear is that this endeavor called
theology isn’t simply about thinking or theorizing; it’s something you
do. As a tradition of inquiry (very much similar to the tradition of
inquiry known as psychology), lived theology is not merely an
academic discipline, nor is it a purely speculative enterprise. It is
also not superficial biblical proof-texting. Rather, it’s a fully
embodied, embedded, and extended practice—a holistic, lifelong
endeavor that emerges from the practitioner’s cultural context,
draws energy from their personal experience, and develops in
conversation with the biblical text, the historic Christian tradition,
and a local worshiping community. So the question isn’t so much
about whether you are doing theology as a psychologist or even
when the most effective times might be to “integrate” it into your
research program or clinical practice. Instead, the question is about
the depth, rigor, and critical self-awareness you bring to a task in
which you are always already engaged.
Why Theology Is Important for Vocation
Even for those who are fairly clear about what the theological task
entails, it is still fair to ask why a psychologist would want to be
theologically informed in the first place. Given everything else
psychology students need to learn during the course of their studies,
including both the mastery of certain domains of knowledge and the

-- 10 of 236 --

completion of countless hours of supervised clinical training, isn’t all
this talk about theology a bit superfluous—a nice but nonessential
addition to an already full plate of more vital matters?
In an important sense, the remainder of this book represents our
attempt to answer this core question in a way that is both rigorous
and accessible. But what we can say at the present moment is that,
if you are someone who identifies as a person of Christian faith, then
everything you do—from school to work to recreation—takes place
coram Deo, or “in the presence of God.” In other words, theology
matters for psychologists because, ultimately, it matters for
everyone. From the standpoint of the historic Christian tradition,
whether we acknowledge it or not, the whole of our lives, including
each and every one of our individual life projects, is caught up in a
deep and substantive relationship with God. It may not yet be clear
whether psychology is your one true calling in life, but whatever it is
you choose to dedicate your time, talents, and creative energies to,
God is present and actively involved in the equation. And having an
adequate theological vocabulary for articulating this reality is a key
component in understanding your work as a psychologist (or any
other endeavor, for that matter) not just as a job or a profession, but
as a vocation.
The English word “vocation” comes from the Latin word
vocare,
which means “to call.” Interestingly enough,
vocare also means “to
name,” which is a helpful way to think about a Christian
understanding of vocation, for it suggests that who we are meant to
be—our central identity or calling—is intimately connected to how
God has named us.
Once again,
Toy Story offers a helpful picture of what this naming
looks like. In this movie, we see this same idea at work in the way
that Woody and the other toys are named. Their owner, Andy, has
literally inscribed his name on their soles (the sole/soul pun is very
much intended). In other words, their core identity and, by
extension, their central calling is to be one of “Andy’s toys.” To live in
line with this vocation, each toy seeks to bring joy to the one whose
name is written on their sole.

-- 11 of 236 --

It’s not a perfect analogy (we are not toys, and God is not an
eight-year-old kid), but it does shed light on the ways in which
theology can give voice to that which might otherwise go unnoticed
and unsaid. More specifically, for those of you called to be
practitioners in any of the subdisciplines of psychology, theology
provides both a vocabulary and a broader conceptual framework for
coming to a deeper understanding of the name that marks your
identity as a beloved child of God.
That being said, a theologically informed approach to
psychological research and clinical practice is about more than
simply coming to an understanding of psychology as a legitimate
vocation for Christians to pursue. It’s also about the various “theo-
logics” that orient and guide the discipline of psychology, even for
those who are not Christian psychologists. Whether it’s psychology’s
understanding of what it means to be human (i.e., anthropology), its
notions about the coherence and predictability of the natural order
(i.e., creation), or its take on how (and whether) the human spirit is
related to other human and nonhuman spirits and, perhaps, even to
the Spirit of Life (i.e., pneumatology), numerous theological
assumptions are in operation at every level of psychological theory-
building, research, and intervention. Thus, by developing a greater
awareness of and competency with the theological tradition,
psychologists are able to equip themselves not only with a deeper
understanding of how certain theological assumptions inform the
practice of psychology but also with a capacity to make these
assumptions transparent and publicly available so that they can be
critically scrutinized by the broader psychological community.
As with any human endeavor, scientific or otherwise, the problem
is not that psychology operates according to a set of methodological
assumptions or theoretical commitments. Those cannot be avoided.
The problem is when these operative assumptions go
unacknowledged and uncritically embraced—that is, when they
become unassailable dogma.
A related problem has to do with how and, on a deeper level,
what it even means to “integrate” the seemingly conflicting
methodologies and theoretical frameworks of theology and

-- 12 of 236 --

psychology. A growing number of educators, scholars, and
practitioners have proposed unique, often competing visions for the
integration of these two disciplines. Nearly every one of these
contributions has come almost exclusively from psychologists who
are sincere and faithful Christians but who are not trained (or
practicing) theologians. As a result, much of the psychology/theology
integration literature is not only
not integrated (because theologians
are often not involved) but also suffers from somewhat thin and
underdeveloped notions of the available theological resources and of
the possible contributions that theology might make to psychology.2
Another consequence is that psychology faculty who are teaching
integration courses in the context of Christian higher education are
increasingly voicing a common set of foundational questions: (1)
What exactly are we doing when we do “integration”? (2) How do
we do it? (3) Where do we start? and (4) Where are the resources?
Our hope is to address these concerns (along with a host of others
that will arise as each chapter unfolds) by offering a more
compelling case not only for
why students of psychology would do
well to develop their theological skills but also for
how they might go
about doing so. Of course, we won’t be able to provide an
exhaustive account of how one might engage in a more theologically
informed approach to psychology (or a more psychologically
informed approach to theology, for that matter), but we do have in
mind four interrelated goals that will, at the very least, get us
moving in the right direction. More specifically, in this book we aim
to do the following:
1. Introduce undergraduate psychology students to some basic
theological terminology and concepts
2. Lay out a “method” for theological reflection that informs the
practice of psychology in both clinical and research settings
3. Identify, develop, and deepen the key theological doctrines that
operate in the background of the practice of psychology and are
essential for engaging in theologically informed psychology

-- 13 of 236 --

4. Upgrade the biblical and theological content of so-called
integration efforts, focusing in particular on the ways in which
theology deepens psychologists’ understanding of their particular
field and their work, whether in their clinical practice, in their
research projects, or in their explicitly integrative endeavors
The structure of the book follows quite naturally from these basic
goals. Part 1 considers what it means to do theology and why it
matters for students of psychology. We begin with a discussion of
theological method (chap. 1), and from that starting point move into
an exploration of God’s trinitarian relations with the created world
(chap. 2), the presence and activity of God’s Spirit outside of the
church (chap. 3), and finally human beings as made in the image of
God (chap. 4). Part 2 shifts from theology “proper” to a more direct
exploration of the practice of psychology. Building on the theological
framework established in the preceding section, in part 2 we focus
on the various metaphysical assumptions that undergird
psychological research, first by reimagining the task of psychology as
a creative capacity to shape creation and to steward and name
aspects of creation (chap. 5). The following chapter considers the
practice of clinical psychology as a collaboration with the Spirit of
God, and the person of the psychologist as a contextual theologian
(chap. 6). The final chapter (chap. 7) proposes that one’s vocation
as a Christian within the work of psychology is part of a larger calling
to find and develop areas of truth regarding the human person and
human behavior that might lead us toward wholeness.
Theology as Spiritual Formation
In order to talk in any meaningful way about what theology is, we
first have to unpack the preconceived ideas and misconceptions
about theology that all of us bring to the table. Depending on your
context, “theology” may be a somewhat neutral (or even
meaningless) term. For others, it may function more like a four-letter
word used to describe an unhelpful and out-of-touch group of old
guys with gray beards obsessed with answering questions no one is

-- 14 of 236 --

asking. So to get at what it means to do theology, we first have to
say a bit about what theology is not. The following “theology is not”
list is by no means comprehensive, but it does name a few of the
most prominent misconceptions we encounter when talking about
theology in our classrooms.
Theology is not simply a reinforcement of what Christians already
think and/or believe.
Theology is not merely or only an elaboration of what the Bible
says—as if we could simply pluck out bits of data from the Bible
and “apply” them directly to our context.
Theology is not a purely intellectual task or academic discipline
that takes place in an ivory tower filled with professionals called
“theologians.”
Theology is not an “orthodoxy test” (or a heresy detector) that
requires you to check a few predetermined doctrinal boxes so
that you can go about your business as usual.
Theology is not google searching for biblical passages that
conveniently align with or reinforce ready-made psychological
constructs.
Now that we’ve gotten that out of the way, let’s move in a more
positive direction and consider for a moment what theology is, or at
least how we will be using the term throughout the book. First and
foremost, theology is a lived wisdom. It’s something you do, and not
merely a way to think about or cognitively process information about
God. It’s a fully embodied, embedded, and extended practice in
which one roots oneself in a living, historic tradition—specifically the
wisdom traditions of the Judeo-Christian faith. To do theology is thus
to join a dynamic and ever-emerging conversation thousands of
years in the making about who God is, who humans are, and what
God is up to in the constantly in-flux world we inhabit. As such,
theology is a lifelong journey. No theologian ever “arrives,” just as no
theological claim is ever final. Everything is provisional because
we’re always engaged in a process of spiritual formation that

-- 15 of 236 --

develops over time, which may sound a bit counterintuitive at first,
but it’s really what makes theology both exciting and evergreen.
The English word “theology” comes from the Greek
theo (god)
and
logos (word), so it literally means words or speech about God.
But theology is not merely an attempt to describe God with language
or to find the right propositional terms to define God in increasingly
precise ways (although it often includes these things). Neither is it a
matter of simply increasing our knowledge about God. Rather,
theology is about knowing God. As Martin Buber would say, it
involves an “I-Thou” encounter.3 It’s a relational endeavor in which
we commune with the One who is present wherever “two or three
are gathered in my name” (Matt. 18:20). To be sure, we certainly
need and want to talk about this encounter in faithful ways—to put
words to our experience so that we can understand it more fully and
communicate it to others more effectively. But in many cases, the
words that are best suited for doing theology are neither descriptive
nor prosaic. They are poetic. They come in the form of prayers,
songs, stories, rituals, and numerous other utterances. This kind of
theology can also take the form of pictures, paintings, and musical
pieces that are “too deep for words” (Rom. 8:26 NRSV).
To come at it from a slightly different angle, doing theology is also
about orthodoxy, but only in a qualified sense. For many, orthodoxy
is about maintaining the status quo. From this perspective, to be
orthodox is to align one’s beliefs with a clearly defined set of
positions deemed appropriate or acceptable by an institutional
authority (religious or otherwise). If your beliefs line up and you
believe them “rightly,” you’re in. If not, you’re out (and you’re a
heretic!).
But theological orthodoxy is about so much more than that. Like
the word “theology,” the word “orthodoxy” comes from the Greek
ortho, meaning straight, and
doxa, meaning glory. So being and
becoming theologically orthodox is not simply about aligning one’s
beliefs with a series of doctrines thought to be correct or true. Just
as one goes to the
orthodontist to straighten one’s teeth or sees an
orthopedic surgeon to straighten one’s bones, joints, and ligaments,

-- 16 of 236 --

theology is about getting one’s “glory” straight. To do so, we
certainly have to increase our knowledge about God, but theological
data alone will never be enough. To straighten our glory, we cannot
pretend as if we are hard drives with skin in need of the latest
operating system update, for theological orthodoxy involves nothing
less than aligning and directing the whole of ourselves toward God—
our thoughts, feelings, emotions, perceptions, attitudes, behaviors,
practices, and, yes, even our propositional beliefs.
This notion of theology as a spiritually formative practice that
involves getting our glory straight is key to understanding not only
what theology is but also how you might go about doing theology in
your context and in light of your calling as psychological scientists
and therapists. Indeed, if you take away nothing else from this book,
our sincere hope is that you are able to recognize that
everything
you do—whether as a clinical psychologist or a case worker or a
spouse or a child or an artist—is always already theological. Again,
it’s not about whether you’re doing theology but rather the degree to
which you are doing theology in a life-giving, critically reflective
mode. Both your person and your work training as psychologists
strike at the heart of this larger project we call “theology.” Indeed,
they are integral to it.
Theology as Embedded (in a Cultural Context)
It is probably fair to assume that readers of this book will have had
various and wide-ranging experiences with theology, anywhere from
none at all to a lifetime of exposure. To account for this diversity,
one of our strategies will be to try our best to make the familiar
strange and the strange familiar, which may be a bit unsettling for
those of you who explicitly identify as part of the Christian tradition.
The reason for this is because by naming and in some cases
challenging the theological assumptions that shape the way we think
about psychology as a discipline and our work as psychologists, what
we are really doing is making visible the many ways in which the
particular sociocultural-historical contexts in which we are embedded
(over)determine much of our theology. In other words, rather than

-- 17 of 236 --

proceed as if our understanding of God, our fellow humans, and the
world in which we live reflects a universal and timeless truth, we are
intentionally bringing to our collective attention the irreducibly
contextual nature of all theology, and this can be particularly
threatening for those who benefit from the totalizing visions of
certain theological programs.
To set your mind at ease about what all this means, allow us to
offer a few clarifying points. We are not suggesting that God is
limited or time-bound but rather that our
perception and
knowledge
of God are. As the apostle Paul says, “For now we see through a
glass, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then
shall I know even as also I am known” (1 Cor. 13:12 KJV). This is
not necessarily a bad thing; rather, it is simply the case that, as
humans, our basic awareness of the world is constituted by the
particular histories we have inherited and the unique contexts in
which we are embedded. In fact, this diverse and radically particular
mode of being—the very thing that makes us human—is not only
beautiful but also a living sign of the kingdom that is to come (Rev.
7:9–12).
The problem is not that we each embody a diverse set of
intersecting cultural identities (e.g., ethnic, linguistic, racial,
gendered), practices (religious, aesthetic, political), products
(artifacts, tools, works of art), and structures (socioeconomic,
ideological, technological). Embodying this set of cultural identities is
just what it means to be human. The trouble comes when we
become blind to (or altogether deny) the fact that our cultural
context both enables and limits our theological vision or, worse yet,
when we allow a culturally idiosyncratic view (usually our own) to
function as the standard by which all other theologies are judged.
When this takes place, “my” theology suddenly becomes capital-T
“Theology” and everything else becomes some sort of derivative—a
lesser version of the real thing.
Thus, as both Christians and psychologists, we must be vigilant in
asking the question of how our own cultural context informs and
constrains our theological and psychological projects. In some cases,
it will be theological resources that are best suited to help us

-- 18 of 236 --

identify, describe, and unpack some of these culturally conditioned
perspectives. In other cases, it will be psychological tools that will
help us the most. Either way, it is crucial that we not only maintain
an awareness of the contextual nature of all theology but also adopt
a fiercely self-critical posture toward our theologizing. We also need
to take the next step and educate ourselves about cultures that are
“other” than our own, especially if we are part of a dominant culture
prone to totalizing claims. Perhaps even more important, though, as
we each develop our cultural competency, we must do so with a
deep and abiding sense of what psychologists call “cultural
humility”—the recognition that we all have gaps in our knowledge
about what it’s like to experience the world as a person from a
culture other than our own.4 Indeed, this describes the fundamental
posture we want to assume in this book.
As two White, cisgender, heterosexual males, we want to
acknowledge the profound ways in which our social location informs
our understanding of theology and psychology (not to mention
reality as a whole) and also call attention to the fact that we are
indeed limited by gaps in our knowledge. We are continually
attempting to increase both our multicultural competency and our
cultural humility, which, much like theology, is a lifelong endeavor
that has no end point. But in the spirit of the kind of cultural humility
we hope to model in this book, our intention is to adopt a stance of
not knowing, accepting that our ability to understand the culture and
experiences of others is limited. Acknowledging our limitations
means that, while we have no other choice but to speak from the
particular locations we inhabit, we can do so in as self-aware and as
self-critical a way as possible. At the same time, recognizing that
ours is neither the normative nor default position means that we
must at every turn draw on voices that originate from a location
other than our own—decentering from the very start this shared
project we call theology. To do otherwise would be to engage in a
willful act of self-blindness. Indeed, it’s one thing to accept that none
of us will ever see perfectly, and then to move forward knowing we
need others to correct our vision. It would be quite another to close

-- 19 of 236 --

our eyes ever more firmly without regard for how our groping about
in the darkness is wreaking havoc on the lives of everyone around
us.
As it concerns our own development as scholars, each day brings
with it a renewed and ever-deepening sense of our many blind
spots, which is why we will forever be indebted to the various
women and people of color whose research, teaching, and
scholarship have indelibly shaped not just the content of this book
but our very lives as well. It is also why we have worked with a
diverse team of scholars to develop a series of supplemental
resources that will not only fill in the knowledge gaps that pervade
this book but also generate critical insights that would otherwise
remain inaccessible to us. We both hold PhDs in theology and
terminal degrees in psychology (Kutter has a PhD in psychological
science; William has a degree in marriage and family therapy and is
in the process of completing a PhD program in psychology), but
these qualifications do not in any way mean that we are somehow
immune to the same kind of blindness that we all bring to the task
of doing theology. In some important respects, these qualifications
make us more and not less susceptible to mistaking multicultural
competency with cultural humility.
Nevertheless, given our ongoing interest in developing a more
robust collaboration between psychology and theology, we both feel
called and compelled to help you deepen and upgrade the
theological content with which you operate as psychologists. But the
journey will produce fruit only if we keep our eyes wide open to the
reality that our theology, like all theology, is deeply contextual and,
in doing so, remain doggedly committed to listening to and learning
from those who have the eyes to see what we cannot.
Theology as Developmental and Traditioned
It will be important to keep the inescapably contextual nature of
theology in mind not only as we explore in greater depth what it
means to do theology but also as we consider what it means to
engage in clinical work in a pluralistic world where both

-- 20 of 236 --

psychologists/therapists and clients bring infinitely complex webs of
overlapping and intersecting cultural identities to the table. In
certain important respects, this kind of complexity is exactly what we
should expect to encounter as theologically informed psychologists,
for a genuine lived theology is ultimately about the whole of our life
in the world, which is both richly diverse and unimaginably complex.
Of course, simply knowing that life is complicated doesn’t make our
task any easier, but if we have any hope of effectively navigating the
many spaces where the theological rubber meets the road, then it is
vital that we come to a realistic assessment of the facts on the
ground.
So rather than ignore or otherwise avoid these complexities, we
are going to encourage you to lean into them and see them as an
opportunity for growth and development. Indeed, one of the main
reasons we are moving toward a more constructive approach in this
book is because the task of doing theology is something that
develops over time. We are constantly working out our beliefs/faith
as we move through life with all of its various experiences. For
instance, you probably thought about psychology and your faith very
differently before you began your undergraduate studies in
psychology. And five years from now you will think about psychology
and your faith differently (hopefully in more complex, thoughtful,
and humble ways). How our theology intersects with psychology is
not always static because our views of self and God, much like our
understanding of psychology, are not static. Ideas about God,
psychology, science, and ourselves continue to develop as we live
life and learn more. This speaks to how practicing theology is
developmental in nature. As we make a concerted effort to grow in
our Christian faith
and expand our knowledge of psychology, we
think about both our faith and psychology differently.
Like any other skill, learning how to do this well (i.e., in a
contextually informed and culturally humble way) takes practice,
which means that it’s not enough to simply read books about
theology, to memorize a bunch of technical terminology, or even to
watch an expert perform at the top of their game (although all these
are great things to do). Somehow and in some way, we must

-- 21 of 236 --

translate our knowledge into embodied action (and continue to do
this over time); otherwise, our theology will remain forever abstract
and inert, untethered from any real-world consequences.
There are of course numerous theologians out there who couldn’t
care less whether their theological projects speak to the concrete
concerns of actual people. But that’s not us. Nor is it reflective of our
approach. More importantly, as students of psychology—a discipline
that has as its central focus the thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of
flesh-and-blood human beings—we don’t think it should be your
approach either. And that’s because, to reiterate, theology is a lived
practice before it is anything else. Knowing certain pieces of
information is both important and necessary, but to quote a
philosopher from the sixth century BCE, “One must learn by doing
the thing; though you think you know it, you have no certainty until
you try.”5
An example taken from experimental psychology might help to
make our point. In a recent study, a team of psychologists asked
one group of participants to watch videos on YouTube featuring
experts doing things like dart throwing, moonwalking, or playing
video games.6 The researchers had another group watch no videos
at all. Afterward, all the participants were asked to perform the same
set of activities. Just as expected, even though one group of
participants knew every detail of every step because they had
watched the YouTube videos, they were no better at actually doing
these tasks than the individuals who hadn’t watched the videos. In
and of itself, that’s not an incredibly interesting finding. What is
interesting is that the people who had acquired knowledge about
how to perform these activities by watching YouTube experts (but
without the benefit of practice) consistently believed and perceived
that they would, in fact, be able to perform the skill well. To put it in
the words of the psychologists who conducted the study, “People’s
actual abilities—from throwing darts and doing the moonwalk to
playing an online game—do not improve after merely watching
others, despite predictions to the contrary.”7

-- 22 of 236 --

It is precisely for this reason that, while training to be a
psychologist/therapist, it’s not enough to simply read books about
therapy or acquire as much information as possible about different
models of psychotherapy (although, again, these are important
components to one’s development as a psychologist). Instead, at
some point, you have to
do therapy. There simply is no replacement
for putting our knowledge about the psychological dynamics of the
human person into practice.
For instance, no one would say that because a person enrolled in
an introductory psychology class in college, or grew up the child of a
psychologist, or even read the
Monitor on Psychology religiously,
that they are somehow capable and equipped to go out and practice
clinical psychology on an unsuspecting public. While these life
experiences are important and need to be acknowledged as
invaluable resources that can inform one’s education, the only way
to be and become a practitioner of clinical psychology who is
capable of providing mental health services that are both responsible
and life-giving is to listen to and learn from the hard-won wisdom of
those who have gone before you—to sit at the feet of veteran clinical
psychologists so that one day, in the not too distant future, you will
be able to engage in the practice of psychology with equal parts
confidence and humility.
The good news is that you don’t do any of this alone or in a
vacuum. Instead, your initial forays into therapy all take place under
the watchful supervision of a practiced (and practicing) clinical
psychologist. In fact, even after finishing all the required coursework
for a doctoral degree, the state mandates that psychologists pass
multiple postdoctoral exams and complete thousands of hours of
supervised clinical training before receiving their license. But that’s
not the end of it. Even with a PhD and license in hand, clinical
psychologists are required to complete a certain number of
continuing education credits each year in order to maintain and
renew their license.
Our point in outlining all these requirements is not to overwhelm
you with a laundry list of obligations, or in any way to discourage
you from pursuing your calling as a clinician. Fulfilling these

-- 23 of 236 --

requirements is well worth the time and effort. Our point is rather
that to walk through the developmental process of being and
becoming a practicing clinical psychologist is to commit oneself to
being and becoming traditioned. Much like their theological
counterparts, psychologists are participants in what Alasdair
MacIntyre would call a “tradition of enquiry.”8 As a discipline,
psychology has a commonly agreed on set of shared practices aimed
toward a particular telos, or goal. So to become a psychologist isn’t
just about finding a job that’s the right fit, nor is it simply about
acquiring a set of technical skills; it is a dynamic, ever-emerging,
lifelong pursuit—a traditioned way of being in the world.
Interestingly enough, the very same thing is true about theology,
which is why we are approaching it as a similar kind of traditioned
practice. In spite of the way academic theologians are trained in the
late-modern West, there are clear parallels here to psychologists
whose work as mental health professionals is known as their clinical
practice. Few readers will likely take issue with this way of framing
clinical psychology—as a living tradition constituted by a
constellation of practices that a broad community of practitioners
agree must be learned and embodied by anyone who wants to
participate in the tradition. But if we said the same about theology,
some might balk (or at least look at us with a raised eyebrow). For
instance, you may go to church every week and faithfully lead your
Bible study. You may be the child of a pastor or missionary or church
planter. You may have even gone to a Bible college or seminary and
received a degree in theology or biblical studies. But none of that on
its own constitutes what it means to practice theology—to be and
become a competent practitioner of theology.9
These are theological activities to be sure, but just as we wouldn’t
confuse the activity of reading a psychology textbook with the actual
practice of clinical psychology, neither should we mistake reading a
book about theology with the actual doing of theology. Which brings
us back to the question with which we began: What does a
theologian actually do?

-- 24 of 236 --

The most direct answer is that theologians commit themselves to
a lifetime of engaging in a formative set of practices that constitute
the historic Christian tradition. But the more impressionistic answer
is that they sit at the feet of a “great cloud of witnesses” (Heb. 12:1)
in order to do theology in a way that is deeply rooted in and
informed by the tradition they have inherited. Either way, they are
joining a centuries-old conversation, listening to and learning from
the hard-won wisdom of those who have gone before them.
This book serves as an open invitation for you to join that
conversation—not as a side project that somehow needs to be
incorporated into your psychological endeavors, but as something
that stands at the core of what you do and who you are as a student
of psychology. Of course, because we are theologians and not space
rangers, we can’t promise that our approach will take us “to infinity
and beyond,” but we do think it’s a pretty good place to start.
Questions for Reflection and Discussion
1. Prior to reading this introduction, how would you have defined
“theology”?
2. How would you describe the ways in which theology matters for
psychology (if at all)?
3. Is there a specific theological tradition that you have inherited?
If so (or if not), how do you think that informs your
understanding of the theological task?
4. Does the idea that you are already a theologian strike you as
odd, daunting, or exciting? Why or why not?
Resources for Reading and Exploration

-- 25 of 236 --

Reyes, Patrick.
Nobody Cries When We Die: God, Community, and Surviving
to Adulthood. St. Louis: Chalice Press, 2018.
Sandage, Steven J., and Jeannine K. Brown.
Relational Integration of
Psychology and Christian Theology: Theory, Research, and Practice. New
York: Routledge, 2018.
Yong, Amos.
Learning Theology: Tracking the Spirit of Christian Faith.
Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2018.
1.
Toy Story, directed by John Lasseter (Emeryville, CA: Pixar Animation
Studios, 1995).
2. The end result, as Steven J. Sandage and Jeannine K. Brown helpfully
point out (and attempt to correct), is an odd sort of insularity and self-
referentiality within the integration literature. For instance, “two of the views
in the
Psychology & Christianity: Five Views (Johnson, 2010) book are
represented by co-authors (a philosopher and psychologist in both cases),
however it is noteworthy that none of the eight contributors to this key volume
is a biblical scholar or theologian in terms of formal academic training.”
Relational Integration of Psychology and Christian Theology: Theory, Research,
and Practice (New York: Routledge, 2018), 10. What is more, as Brad Strawn
and his colleagues have noted, the Reformed tradition has been
overrepresented among the practicing psychologists contributing to the
integration literature, which has led to a “generic Reformed perspective” that
has further narrowed the range of theological paradigms entertained by
integrationists. Brad D. Strawn, Ronald W. Wright, and Paul Jones, “Tradition-
Based Integration: Illuminating the Stories and Practices That Shape Our
Integrative Imagination,”
Journal of Psychology and Christianity 33, no. 4
(2014): 300–310.
3. Martin Buber,
Ich und Du [I and Thou] (Leipzig: Insel Verlag, 1923).
4. Dean M. Abbott, Noelany Pelc, and Caitlin Mercier, “Cultural Humility and
the Teaching of Psychology,”
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in
Psychology 5, no. 2 (2019): 169–81.
5. Sophocles, “Trachiniae,” in
The Dramas of Sophocles Rendered in English
Verse, Dramatic and Lyric, trans. George Young (London: Sagwan Press,
2015), 191.
6. Michael Kardas and Ed O’Brien, “Easier Seen Than Done: Merely Watching
Others Perform Can Foster an Illusion of Skill Acquisition,”
Psychological
Science 29, no. 4 (2018): 521–36.
7. Kardas and O’Brien, “Easier Seen Than Done,” 521.

-- 26 of 236 --

8. Alasdair MacIntyre,
Whose Justice? Which Rationality? (Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1988), 79–80.
9. We are both from a tradition that affirms the priesthood of all believers
and that all Christians (perhaps even all humans) are, in fact, theologians.
However, we are drawing a distinction here between formal and folk levels of
both psychology and theology. Just as Sandage and Brown note, “Theology
and psychology are formal scholarly disciplines, but at a more basic folk level
everyone is both a theologian and psychologist . . . since everyone holds
assumptions, however implicit, about ultimate concerns (theology), and
everyone also engages in observations about people and the world around
them (psychology).”
Relational Integration, 11.

-- 27 of 236 --



-- 28 of 236 --



-- 29 of 236 --

1
How to Do Constructive
Theology
Key takeaways from this chapter:
Theology is something you do; it involves seeing the world with
wisdom and discernment.
The theological task involves at least five resources (Bible, church,
tradition, experience, culture).
Doing theology is a dynamic process and not a set procedure.
Along with numerous other cultural forms, psychology serves as a
critical resource for doing theology.
As a kid, I (Kutter) had terrible eyesight. I just didn’t always know it.
In fact, I distinctly remember the moment I realized how bad my
vision really was. My parents were driving me home from the
optometrist’s office, and I was wearing my first set of prescription
lenses. Dusk was falling, so I found myself looking out the car
window at the moon. Awestruck by what I could now see, I
continued to take my glasses off and put them on again. The
difference was both glaring and astonishing. I had always known the
moon existed because I wasn’t completely blind, which basically
meant I could identify the general location of that fuzzy glowing orb
in the night sky. But never had I known how glorious the moon
could be. The complexity of its cratered surface, the clarity of its
circumference, the brilliance of the halos of light emanating from its
center—revelations each. I was nothing short of transfixed.

-- 30 of 236 --

Prior to that evening I had simply assumed everyone else saw the
world in the same way that I did, which is to say, as blurry and
nondescript. After all, the moon was simply too far away for anyone
to see it with any sort of clarity. It wasn’t until I was handed a set of
corrective lenses that I realized just how much I had been missing
and just how much more there was to see and understand. Before
then, I was seeing only in the most technical sense. With my new
lenses, however, I was able to make out far more detail, more
depth, and more texture. Even though nothing had changed about
my surroundings, everything had changed. It was as if a whole new
world had opened up before me—one that I had inhabited my entire
life but had never truly known, much less understood.
Of course, my story is by no means exceptional. Countless others
suffer from some degree or kind of vision impairment, both literal
and metaphorical. The apostle Paul said as much when he wrote to
the church at Corinth that we all “see through a glass, darkly” (1 Cor.
13:12 KJV). According to Paul, we see (Greek:
blepomen) through a
reflective surface (
di esoptrou) in an enigma (
en ainigmati). In other
words, life is incredibly complex and few things are clear. Nothing is
straightforward or simple. It’s almost as if, from the apostle’s
perspective, the whole of human life is one long attempt to make
sense of a series of ancient, cryptic riddles presented in reverse
image on a mirror made of hammered sheet metal. Or, to put a
more modern spin on it, we’re all like nearsighted kids trying to see
and describe to one another the various intricacies of a glowing rock
238,900 miles away. Needless to say, that’s no small task.
Centuries after Paul, the philosopher Hans-Georg Gadamer would
suggest something similar. All humans, said Gadamer, interpret,
understand, and, ultimately, come to know the world and their place
in it from a “historically situated consciousness” (i.e., a particular
sociohistorical location), which establishes the horizon beyond which
they cannot see.1 Following both Paul’s and Gadamer’s line of
thinking, some emphasize the negative implications of this all-too-
human reality, focusing on the ways that our vision is inherently
limited, obscured, or otherwise clouded by the “darkness” of the

-- 31 of 236 --

“glass” through which we see. Indeed, our vision is often far more
impaired than we realize. In the absence of corrective lenses, we
remain blind to the true depth of our blindness.
Thus, for both Paul and Gadamer, there’s no denying that we see
through a glass,
darkly. However, there is also no denying that we
can still
see through that glass, even if darkly. This somewhat more
positive assessment of the human condition should not be mistaken
for a naive optimism that would ignore or deny the very real
consequences of sin. Rather, it reflects an understanding of the
created order as fundamentally constituted by God’s trinitarian
relationality, a topic we will take up in greater detail in the following
chapter. For now it is enough to say that, regardless of whether one
emphasizes clarity or obscurity, the inescapable truth is that to be
human is simply to envision the world through a particular set of
lenses that are not merely “coloring” our view of the world but also
making it possible. The opaque mirrors that provide us with an
indirect awareness of reality are the very things that create the
necessary conditions for any human knowledge at all. From this
perspective, the problem is not so much that everything we know
about reality is always already filtered in some form or fashion.
That’s just part of what it means to be a human being. Rather, the
problem is that we so often fail to recognize that our vision is filtered
through any kind of lens at all.
We humans are masters at convincing ourselves that our picture
of the world corresponds directly to the way things really are—as if
my localized perspective somehow provides me with a total or all-
encompassing view of reality that holds true for everyone,
everywhere, at all times. In other words, if the moon is blurry to me,
then it must be blurry for everyone because, as we all know, moons
are just blurry. On this point, students of psychology share
something in common with their theological counterparts, for both
traditions of inquiry are concerned, on the one hand, with exposing
the various ways in which we are blind to our own blindness (on
both conscious and unconscious levels) and, on the other hand, with
developing a deeper, more penetrating insight into the human
condition. In this way, both psychology and theology seek to develop

-- 32 of 236 --

constructive visions of life that will ultimately lead to human
flourishing, but they also recognize that, in order to do so, we have
to be honest about the ways in which our vision is at best, limited,
and at worst, obscured.
To say that our vision is obscured is not to make a moral
judgment. It is rather to say that, because we are all located
somewhere, our vision is simply limited. No one has a view from
nowhere. Again, that’s just what it means to be human. At other
times though, as the psychoanalytic tradition reminds us, we are
willfully self-blinded. Making matters worse, we are also blinded by
others on both interpersonal and societal levels. Still, regardless of
the origins of our vision impairment, we have no chance of seeing
clearly if we don’t first acknowledge that each of us, in some form or
fashion, needs our vision enhanced, expanded, and refined.
To move toward this kind of clarity of vision, students of
psychology and theology must find a way to come to terms not only
with
what we see when we look upon the world but also with
how
we see. That is, we need a process that will enable us to see more
clearly—a rigorous and reliable method that will be capable of
expanding our field of view by drawing on a broader and more
diverse set of resources and, at the very same time, refining our
vision by allowing us to name and critically engage the various
assumptions that (for good and for ill) inform and constrain our
pictures of reality. Of course, a constructive theological method of
this kind would be helpful for any person of faith hoping to see the
world with a greater degree of clarity. However, just as a reminder,
our primary concern in this book is not with Christians in general but
with students of psychology in particular. Our chief aim is to equip
them with a more robust set of tools and resources that will enable
them to develop a growing capacity for engaging in and reflecting on
psychological topics, practices, and questions in ways that are
theologically informed (not to mention theologically interesting!).
To make this all a bit more concrete, consider the phoropter for a
moment (see fig. 1.1). Anyone who relies on vision correction knows
what a phoropter is, even if they have never heard the term. A
phoropter is that medieval looking contraption an optometrist uses

-- 33 of 236 --

during eye exams. The goal of an eye exam is obvious: clarity of
vision. However, the method the optometrist uses to determine the
correct prescription for a person’s contacts or eyeglasses is
somewhat heuristic. She cycles through a series of lenses, trying out
various combinations, asking the patient to decide which lens allows
them to see more clearly: “Lens number one, or lens number two?
Number three, or number four?” It is a dynamic, iterative, discovery-
oriented method based on a good deal of trial and error. More
importantly, though, the goal of the process is not to find the one
right lens that will deliver 20/20 vision, but rather to identify the
unique combination of lenses that will provide the clearest picture of
the object in view. And this kind of clarity emerges not by peering
through a solitary lens but through a convergence of multiple lenses.
Figure 1.1. The phoropter [Rohane Hamilton / shutterstock.com]
Focusing Our Vision
The phoropter serves as a helpful metaphor for thinking about
theological method in general and its relationship to psychology
more specifically, in large part because it dispels some of our

-- 34 of 236 --

misconceptions about what a method is and whether or not theology
could ever be methodological.2 You might think of theological
method as somewhat analogous to what you would find in the
methods section of an article published in a psychology journal, but
with some very important qualifications. In the first place, as
Bernard Lonergan rightly points out, “Method is not a set of rules to
be followed meticulously by a dolt. It is a framework for collaborative
creativity.”3 Rather than establishing a series of rigid steps designed
to (re)produce a predetermined outcome, a theological method is a
dynamic, creative, collaborative mode of reflection that seeks to
generate insight (i.e., clarity of vision) by attending to a number of
sources (i.e., lenses)—namely, the biblical text, a local worshiping
community (often connected to a denomination), the historical
theological tradition, one’s personal experience, and the broader
cultural context.
We will say more below regarding each of these normative
sources, but for now it is enough to say that, as with a phoropter,
the most helpful way to proceed is not to find a single, all-purpose
lens that can deliver 20/20 vision, but instead to rotate through
various combinations of lenses, paying special attention to points of
convergence and divergence. Unfolding as it does in real time and in
response to concrete, lived experiences, a method of this sort does
not operate according to a set procedure; rather, it is an iterative
process intended to generate cumulative and progressive insights.4
While the goal of the process is to gain clarity about the world in
general, as a
theological method, its more specific aim is to develop
clarity regarding who God is, who we are as humans in relation to
God, and, by extension, how we might participate in the presence
and movement of God in the world.
Here, students of psychology will once again find themselves at
home within the domain of theology, for neither psychologists nor
theologians pursue deeper and more penetrating insights into the
human condition simply for the sake of self-edification (although it
can be personally quite edifying). In a very real sense, the whole
project is simply dead on arrival if it fails to move in the direction of

-- 35 of 236 --

helping others. Much like optometrists making the most of a
phoropter, theologians develop a method so that they might grow in
wisdom themselves. But additionally, they seek to turn to others and
ask, What if you looked at things through a different set of lenses?
Which is clearer, lens number one or number two? Number three or
number four?
Speaking less metaphorically and a bit more technically, what we
are really talking about is developing a theological hermeneutic—a
way of critically and appreciatively
seeing and comprehending what
might be called the “poetics” of life.5 As a hermeneutic, it functions
as a means for describing, interpreting, and understanding what
humans make of the world (
poiēsis) in which we live, move, and
have our being. At the same time, it’s an approach that allows room
for (and sometimes demands) the reformulation of certain
theological categories in light of our ever-changing contexts and in
response to the data generated by fields of inquiry traditionally
thought to be outside the domain of theology, such as psychology
and the empirical sciences. In this respect, what we are describing in
this chapter and will be demonstrating in subsequent chapters is not
a static, linear procedure but a dynamic process for engaging in the
practice of constructive theology that develops over time and in
response to our on-the-ground experiences.
To be clear, we are proposing a constructive theological method
because the focus of this book is on how students of psychology
might go about doing theology as a lived practice.6 It is therefore
not an introduction to systematic theology, historical theology, or
philosophical theology. We are not attempting to identify a single,
coherent system of thought that can be traced throughout the
various biblical, historical, and philosophical accounts. Neither is this
necessarily a book on how to “integrate” theology and psychology,
even if it might turn out to be helpful for those involved in
integration efforts.7 If anything, our approach to constructive
theology precedes (and possibly supersedes) the integrative gesture
by locating it within a larger interpretive framework. As biblical
scholar and theologian Joel Green has suggested, given our account

-- 36 of 236 --

of the doctrine of creation (which we will describe more fully in the
next chapter),
Theology is an all-encompassing enterprise, so that subsequent
segregation of science from theology could not mean that science would
fall outside the purview of theology. Moreover, in so far as science is
present as one of the sources for the theological enterprise, theology
remains open to the possibility of reformulation in relation to scientific
discovery. . . . The question is not whether science will influence exegesis
(or vice versa) since the two, science and religion, have interacted and
continue to interact in a far more organic way than is typically
acknowledged.8
As a consequence of this line of thinking, one of our operating
assumptions is that students of psychology (and practitioners of
psychology more broadly) need not become experts, for example, in
the formulation of logical theorems or the historical development of
theological doctrines. Rather, they first and foremost need a way of
doing theology that allows them to put their theological know-how
into practice. Because their primary task is to respond in life-giving
ways to the infinitely complex, lived situations of other flesh-and-
blood human beings, they are most in need of a dynamic, adaptable
process that will provide them resources for elaborating on these
concrete scenarios in ways that are necessarily creative and even
improvisational, but no less clinically sound and theologically robust.
In certain respects, this is an imminently practical approach to
theology. We are more concerned with developing a reliable set of
strategies than we are with the tidiness of a particular syllogism or
logical proof. This stands to reason because, much like therapy,
constructive theology is anything but tidy. Both operate in realms
that are inherently complex, which means that even if we could
imagine the perfect set of doctrines that would make sense of each
and every psychological construct, it would still be far from obvious
which of these theological concepts apply in any given situation,
much less how to apply them.
The challenge, then, is not how we might bring together two
discrete intellectual disciplines, as if psychology (whether folk or

-- 37 of 236 --

professional) and the psychological sciences weren’t always already
forming and informing our theology. Nor is it how to apply ready-
made theological doctrines to a concrete psychological problem (or
vice versa). Our key concern is how students of psychology might
respond faithfully to the world they inhabit from their own
sociocultural context—a “respond-ability” that requires both keen
insight and discernment. And for that, we need something more
than systematic formulations and models of integration, however
helpful they may be. Put a bit more simply, we need a holistic way of
doing theology (i.e., a method) that generates a lived wisdom.9
Scientific Method and Theological Method
One of the difficulties we immediately encounter when it comes to
describing this kind of constructive theological method for students
of psychology is that, by and large, the word “method” means
something quite different in psychological literature than it does in
theological writing. Part of this confusion stems from the historical
development of psychology, which originally started as a kind of
philosophy of human thought, emotion, and behavior but eventually
shifted more into the realm of the social sciences.10 Many of the
subdisciplines within contemporary psychology (e.g., cognitive
science, psychoanalysis, psychology of religion) continue to hover in
an ambiguous space between philosophy, the social sciences, and
the natural sciences. Nevertheless, over the course of the past
hundred years, practitioners of psychology as a whole have made a
concerted effort to adopt the research methods and empirical tools
of the “hard” sciences. As a result, the term “method” is most often
deployed among psychologists to mean the linear, predictive,
replicable techniques used to construct and empirically test scientific
hypotheses (think again of the methods section in a psychology
article published in a peer-reviewed journal). From this standpoint, a
hypothesis may very well offer a compelling explanation of a given
psychological phenomenon, but its primary value is that it generates

-- 38 of 236 --

accurate (i.e., mathematically significant) predictions about the
observable world.
Figure 1.2. The scientific method [Photo by Kutter Callaway]
There are a number of ways to describe the scientific method, but
for our purposes we can’t do much better than the description we
learned in kindergarten (see fig. 1.2). This basic, even elementary,
understanding of “how to be a scientist” is not radically different
from the way we might describe “how to be a theologian.” Indeed,
the process by which one engages in scientific inquiry shares
similarities with the process by which one engages in constructive

-- 39 of 236 --

theology. For instance, theological inquiries usually begin with an
intractable question (about God, humans, and/or the world in which
we live), and an initial prediction regarding how that question might
be answered (i.e., a hypothesis). To explore this question, a plan is
developed (experimental design), and a series of normative
resources is consulted (conducting the investigation). Finally,
observations are described, analyzed, and interpreted (recording
data), and provisional conclusions are offered, which often include
comments regarding limitations and possible directions for future
research (conclusion).
These similarities notwithstanding, there are also important
differences between the scientific method and what we mean by
theological method. One key difference is that constructive theology
locates the findings of scientific research within a larger theological
framework. The insights generated by psychology are thus but one
of a number of different data points from which the theologian
draws. In truth, psychological scientists are only able to interpret
and understand the data generated by their empirical research
because they too operate within theoretical frameworks of some
kind. Just as Thomas Kuhn suggested, all science takes place within
a prevailing paradigm, which consists of a common (read:
normative) set of theories, methods, goals, and even beliefs about
the world.11 The difference is that, whereas constructive theology
makes the interpretive lenses guiding its explorations explicit, the
natural sciences often elide (and sometimes altogether deny) their
influence.
Put somewhat differently, both psychology and theology are
inherently “traditioned” forms of inquiry, which simply means that
anyone who operates within these traditions has inherited certain
ways of understanding not only what they think their project is all
about but also how to go about doing it.12 Each of us is located
somewhere (historically, socially, ethnically, culturally), and this basic
situatedness shapes not only how we see the world but also how we
are related to what we see (i.e., the objects that come into our field
of vision). Indeed, anyone engaged in the practice of theology and

-- 40 of 236 --

psychology would do well to come to a point where they are able to
acknowledge that there is no such thing as an unfiltered, detached,
or objective view “from nowhere.”
As a consequence, identifying one’s tradition and gaining clarity
regarding its operative assumptions are critical parts of the
constructive theological process. Whether a student of psychology or
theology (or both), we always draw on other sources for making
sense of empirical science, and perhaps more importantly, these
sources function normatively and thus authoritatively, even if they go
unnoticed. For example, clinical and research psychologists operate
with implicit but often unacknowledged anthropologies (views of
what it means to be human) and ontologies (views of what kind of
“being” humans are) that inform, guide, and constrain their
explorations of human thinking, feeling, and behavior. Even when
they remain implicit, these perspectives regarding what it means to
be human (and what a human is) determine not only which
behaviors they find interesting but also how they gather and analyze
their data and what they ultimately make of their research. By
simply acknowledging these tradition-laden, embedded assumptions
about human beings, we are able to critically examine them, explore
how they are exerting pressure on our research projects, and revise,
expand, or abandon them when necessary. In doing so, we also
open our explorations to public scrutiny, which, in important
respects, is actually a more as opposed to a less rigorous
commitment to empirical methodologies.
A Process for Doing Constructive Theology
To describe theological method in this way is to identify at least two
levels of discourse. Consider the phoropter again. On one level, it is
helpful to step back and consider the device itself, inspecting the
various lenses we are using, the overall sequence according to which
we cycle through them, and even whether a given situation might
call for an entirely different device. Second-order discourse of this
kind is often called methodology, and it functions as a way of
critically examining the apparatus itself—both the lenses through

-- 41 of 236 --

which we see the world and how they interact with one another.
However, when we refer to a particular method for doing
constructive theology, we are talking about what takes place when
we use this device in the real world. On this level, rather than
looking
at a particular set of lenses and talking
about them, we are
looking
through them.13 What this means for students of psychology
is that to do constructive theology is, at its most basic, to engage in
the practice of cycling through a series of mutually clarifying lenses
in pursuit of a deeper understanding of human thought and
behavior.
There is no single (or perfect) way of categorizing the various
resources that are necessary for doing theology. Still, we can name
at least five “lenses” that theologians in the (Protestant) Christian
tradition have commonly peered through in order to gain clarity on
their lives and the world: (1) the biblical text, (2) one’s local
worshiping community, (3) the historical theological tradition,
(4) one’s personal experience, and (5) the broader cultural context.
It is important to keep in mind that this list is not organized
according to any sort of hierarchy or preferred sequence. Each
resource is critical in its own right, but there is no set procedure or
starting point that dictates how we ought to cycle through these
various lenses because, again, the key is to allow the insights from
each domain to augment and clarify the others (see fig. 1.3).
Depending on the topic about which we are seeking clarity (e.g.,
social media), it might be best to start by reflecting on one’s
personal experience, one’s cultural context, and how the
discernment criteria of one’s local church sheds light on the matter
before moving to an (equally important) consideration of how the
biblical text and the history of theological reflection inform,
constrain, or otherwise guide these other perspectives.14 It may
even be helpful to experiment with some different sequences,
considering the various insights that might emerge simply by
choosing a new point of departure. Rather than determining
beforehand where to begin or how the process will unfold, the key is
to allow the unique focal point of each exploration (e.g., the spiritual

-- 42 of 236 --

and psychological
effects of social media) to suggest and, in certain
respects, determine where to start and how to proceed.
Figure 1.3. The five lenses of theology
Speaking of social media, it is also the case that, while it is
important to cycle through each lens at some point in the process,
they are not always equally helpful. Augustine and Thomas Aquinas
knew nothing of digital technologies, so even though these two
stalwarts of the historic theological tradition offer keen insights into
the human condition, they may not be the first or even primary
source one consults in order to make theological sense of the social
media habits of contemporary individuals. In this case, it is likely
that we would be better served to draw primarily on the resources
provided by our broader cultural context (e.g., media psychology)
and to place those insights into a mutually enriching conversation
with our local worshiping community, which is comprised of
numerous other people of faith who are also attempting to navigate

-- 43 of 236 --

this media-saturated landscape with wisdom and discernment. To be
clear, this is not to say that the Bible and the theological tradition are
somehow unimportant or have nothing to say regarding
contemporary phenomena like social media. It is rather to say that
the ever-changing contexts we inhabit present a unique set of
challenges that call for a mode of theological exploration that is
equal parts nimble, creative, and adaptive.
For those who were hoping for more of a “plug-and-play”
approach to theology, it might be more frustrating than fruitful to
hear us repeatedly insist that all theological reflection is contextual
and that every theological question comes with a unique set of
demands. In the process of unpacking the various
misconceptions
we all harbor about the nature and aims of theology, a certain
amount of uneasiness is to be expected. But at a certain point,
frustration can lead to disengagement, which would be the exact
opposite of our desired outcome. So rather than continue responding
to every question of “Where should we start?” with a cryptic “It
depends,” it’s probably more helpful to point out that, based on our
own experience, one of the most productive places to start is
anywhere tension or dissonance can be found among the various
theological resources.
At the risk of mixing our metaphors, Warren Brown has suggested
something similar with his “resonance model.” Brown, a
neuropsychologist also engaged in constructive theological work,
pictures the various sources of human knowledge as radios that
broadcast signals with a particular frequency and wavelength, each
of which has unique implications for our understanding of “truth.”15
The most reliable knowledge emerges at the point of convergence
where the sound waves from various domains—namely science,
rationality, experience, tradition, and Scripture—meet and overlap.
For Brown, no single source or signal can be equated with the truth
(not even Scripture). Nevertheless, our understanding of reality is
enhanced and enriched when the signals in this acoustic field
resonate with one another. Likewise, our understanding can become
muddied when there is only dissonance.

-- 44 of 236 --

Brown’s is an aural rather than visual metaphor, but the
implications are the same. In essence, to do theology is to seek a
deeper understanding of truth by engaging in a dynamic, iterative
process that brings together a multitude of epistemic sources. As
such, a certain amount of dissonance is not only to be expected but
is generative. Returning to our visually oriented metaphor, these
points of tension are not hurdles to overcome but are rather
opportunities for generating insight. Indeed, as philosopher and
ethicist Caroline Simon has noted, “Orthodoxy is too often assumed
to preclude multiplicity. If views are lenses, however, . . . multiplicity
plus convergence yields clarity.”16 In other words, the goal of the
theological task is not just about developing an ability to see the
world (sight), it’s about seeing the world well (insight). And to see
the world well—to gain insight—we often need to look through a
multitude of (sometimes contrasting) lenses at one and the same
time.
Our hope in describing this kind of approach to constructive
theological inquiry is that it will resonate with a wide swath of
Protestant sensibilities. Nevertheless, it remains a profoundly
traditioned approach to theology, which means that the process we
are outlining here might not reflect the same commitments and
assumptions as the tradition each of our readers has inherited.17
Although we believe it reflects how lived theology most often takes
place on the ground, some may be more comfortable with an
established procedure—one that, for example, always begins with an
analysis of the biblical material and seeks to interpret personal
experience, the wisdom of the local church, the history of theological
reflection, and the broader culture in and through this singular lens.
Karl Barth is well known to have described his theological method in
precisely this way: “Take your Bible and take your newspaper, and
read both. But interpret newspapers from your Bible.”18 Using our
terminology, Barth was suggesting that a key resource for doing
theology is indeed one’s broader cultural context (the newspaper).
But for Barth, the Bible should always serve as the fixed “lens”

-- 45 of 236 --

through which everything else ought to be interpreted and
understood.
In certain respects, we are of the same mind as Barth concerning
the role of Scripture in theology. As theologians, we consider the
Bible authoritative for Christian life and practice—essential for the
task of doing theology. There may be instances in which the biblical
text has very little to say about a given topic, but at no point are we
simply free to dismiss it or disregard it. That is to say,
what the Bible
means will always be open to interpretation and up for debate, but
that the Bible matters is not in question. Borrowing again from
Alasdair MacIntyre, the Christian theological tradition is constituted
by nothing other than our shared commitment to argue about what
this authoritative text means.19
That being said, we are also suggesting that, at times, it is
appropriate (and even advisable) to “reverse the hermeneutical flow”
and interpret the biblical text in light of the newspaper.20 Some,
following Barth, might worry that to move in this direction is to
undermine biblical authority or to subject it to the fickle winds of
sociocultural change. But these fears are largely unfounded for two
reasons. First, while it is always important to avoid reading into the
biblical text that which is simply not there (i.e., eisegesis), the truth
of the matter is that we have no other choice but to read Scripture
from our situated standpoint—from the concrete, sociocultural
context in which we are embedded. Yet, rather than being a problem
to solve, this is simply part of what it means for the biblical text to
function as authoritative Scripture for the people of God. We read
the biblical text not as isolated individuals in a hermetically sealed
chamber but as members of a particular community, located in a
specific time and place, responding to concrete issues. There simply
is no such thing as a “plain” reading of the text. Pretending as if
there were risks a host of self-serving distortions rooted in a lack of
self-awareness.
Second, given that the Bible stands at the heart of the
constructive theological task, it is important to underscore that, in its
function as Scripture, no interpretation of the biblical text takes

-- 46 of 236 --

place in the absence of the ongoing presence and activity of the
Spirit of God. The same can be said of theological reflection more
broadly. It is a fundamentally in-spirit-ed endeavor, which means
that, whether we are interpreting the Bible from the newspaper or
vice versa, the entire theological project hinges on the ongoing
presence and activity of the Spirit of God who holds these various
perspectives together in their creative tension. And just as we can
be confident that the Spirit is at work in and through our reading of
Scripture, so too can we be confident that, in conversation with our
local worshiping community, the larger theological tradition, our
personal experience, and the biblical text, the Spirit is also up to
something in the broader culture.
A Cultural Lens
For the most part, the five lenses we have identified as normative
resources for the theological task are fairly self-explanatory. As we
endeavor not simply to know about God but to know God more
deeply in our concrete lives, it is critical that we consider what the
biblical text has to say (Bible), what our local worshiping community
has discerned (church), how the historic theological tradition we
have inherited navigated similar terrain (tradition), and the lived
wisdom we have cultivated in our journey of discipleship
(experience). For the sake of clarity, we have been talking about
these resources as if they were distinct, but in truth they are always
already interrelated, which means that a major element of the
constructive theological process is simply being more critically aware
of their constant interaction and, by extension, more intentional
about how their various points of convergence and divergence might
help us sharpen our vision.
Culture, the final lens, is likely the most fuzzy, both in terms of
what it means and in terms of how it might serve as a theological
resource. The primary reason is because, much like the word
“method” (and “theology”!), the word “culture” often functions as an
umbrella term that ends up being used in different ways by different
people (even within the same discipline) depending on the context

-- 47 of 236 --

and the audience. For instance, the great majority of psychology
students are exposed to the term “culture” as if it were entirely
about racial and ethnic diversity. However, cultural psychologists
Hazel Rose Markus and Alana Connor define culture much more
broadly as “the ideas, institutions, and interactions that tell a group
of people how to think, feel, and act.”21 Their definition reflects their
primary goal as psychologists, which is not so much to understand
culture per se, but how culture generates our sense of self, that is,
our enculturated identity. Employing a slightly different definition,
evolutionary biologist Robert Boyd suggests that culture is “the
storehouse of gradually accumulated, local, and typically tacit
knowledge.”22 On Boyd’s view, culture is more than a mere set of
ideas that humans pass on to one another; it is the evolutionary
principle that has enabled humans to spread, adapt, and thrive in
nearly every ecological niche on the planet.23
A distinct but related definition can be found in the work of
neuroscientist Antonio Damasio: “Humans have distinguished
themselves from all other beings by creating a spectacular collection
of objects, practices, and ideas, collectively known as cultures. The
collection includes the arts, philosophical inquiry, moral systems and
religious beliefs, justice, governance, economic institutions, and
technology and science.”24 Notably, Damasio’s notion of culture
shares certain similarities to Boyd’s, and Marcus and Connor’s.
However, beyond the transmission of shared knowledge, culture for
Damasio also includes the creation of material objects and systems
of belief. Depending on one’s perspective, this more expansive view
of culture either complicates matters to such a degree that the word
means nothing because it covers everything that humans do, or it
makes culture a rich and fertile ground calling for exploration.
These complexities notwithstanding, because our aim is to
incorporate “culture” into a larger theological project, our definition
is, like Damasio’s, somewhat broad. From a theological perspective,
we can say that culture is “what humans make of God’s creation.”25
It might strike some as a fairly straightforward definition, but a

-- 48 of 236 --

number of assumptions about the created order, human creativity,
and divine agency are embedded within it. We will say more about
these theological assumptions in the chapters to come, but for now
it is enough to say that human culture-making assumes numerous
forms. Each embodies a distinct set of features, yet shares a
common thread, or “trace,” with the others. Framed in this way, we
can think of culture as something that is both tangible and
intangible, both the concrete artifacts a society generates and the
volksgeist (i.e., the spirit of the people) that animates these creative
activities (we’ll return to a discussion of how the Spirit of God relates
to the spirit of people in chap. 3).
Whatever we call the common thread that ties together the
various strands of a society’s creative work, the primary point is that
culture is embodied, expressed, and transmitted in and through a
variety of forms that range from the concrete and particular to the
abstract and general. Starting with the most concrete, we can think
of human culture in terms of its material
products—the various
symbolic and technological artifacts it creates (e.g., tools, texts,
works of art). But culture also finds expression in a constellation of
practices (religious, aesthetic, political) that organize and orient our
shared lives together, many of which incorporate (and give meaning
to) the material artifacts we produce. These practices, in turn, serve
as the lifeblood of numerous cultural
institutions. The boundaries
that distinguish institutions from the individuals that make up those
institutions are often blurry, but generally speaking, institutions
operate as both (1) a network of systems (technological, economic,
legal) that organize our social landscape and determine how we
ought to navigate our communal lives and (2) a series of underlying
structures (political, ideological, mythological) that lend a sense of
coherence to our collective activities, most often by providing us
with robust narrative resources for envisioning our culturally specific
social arrangements as completely “natural”—that is, as a reflection
not of our particular location but of the way things truly are.
By mentioning these deep structures, we are naming a more
abstract dimension of culture. But that doesn’t mean it has no
bearing on everyday life. Rather, at this level of abstraction, culture

-- 49 of 236 --

begins to demonstrate a kind of non- or extra-human agency,
exerting a top-down or whole-part influence that operates outside of
human control and often without our consent. Indeed, it is only at
this level of abstraction that we can speak reasonably about cultural
phenomena (e.g., artistic trends, societal movements, political
uprisings) and develop
theories (whether philosophical, social-
scientific, or critical) that explain these phenomena in terms of how
they are causally associated with the construction of our
identities
(ethnic, linguistic, tribal, sexual).
Interestingly enough, the discipline of psychology is implicated in
each of these cultural domains:
products (research studies, journal articles, books)
practices (clinical work, laboratory research, professional
conference-going)
institutions (universities, professional societies)
phenomena (renewed nationalism, popularized cognitive
behavioral techniques for weight loss)
theoretical frameworks (psychodynamic, developmental,
evolutionary)
Significantly, each of these aspects of psychology plays a part in the
development of our sense of self and in our ability to come to a
deeper understanding of our own intersecting
identities as
enculturated human beings.
As a result, the clinical methods, empirical tools, and theoretical
frameworks of the psychological sciences are capable of providing
Christians with much-needed insight into this thing we call “culture”
(including the culture of psychology), especially as it concerns what
it means to be a human inhabiting a particular culture, what it
means for those humans to thrive in their own cultural context, and
how we understand our role in helping other humans feel, think, and
behave in ways that lead to their flourishing. Because it is a human
project, psychology is far from perfect, but as one of numerous
other lenses incorporated into the constructive theological task, it

-- 50 of 236 --

helps clarify our vision, granting us a depth of understanding
regarding the human condition that would otherwise remain
inaccessible.
On the Other Side of the Phoropter
Some may be slightly uncomfortable with our apparent willingness to
place the findings of the psychological sciences into a mutually
enriching dialogue with the historic theological tradition or, perhaps
even more distressingly, the biblical text. We will not be able to
dispel these concerns in their entirety, but we do hope to show that
it is for expressly theological reasons that we are able to identify
psychology as a trustworthy (and even authoritative) source that can
inform and guide our understanding of who God is and who we are
as human beings. In fact, as the next chapter discusses in greater
detail, it is creation’s trinitarian structure that underwrites our ability
to endorse what we discover about the world through psychology (or
any science, for that matter). Likewise, in chapter 3 we consider how
a robust pneumatology (i.e., our view of the Spirit) encourages us to
approach culture with the expectation that we will encounter God
already at work in people’s lives. Finally, chapter 4 considers the
incarnation as the key theological doctrine animating our approach
to positive psychology and its vision of human flourishing.
Still, questions will inevitably remain. Which of the various lenses
has the final word? When, where, and how does contemporary
psychology function authoritatively, and what are its limits? How do
we know whether our personal experience is blinding us to what
Scripture says or granting us much-needed insight into an aspect of
the biblical text that would otherwise go unseen and unnoticed?
None of these questions are easily addressed, and in certain
respects, that is exactly the point. At the risk of overstatement,
constructive theology is rarely if ever concerned about questions that
are straightforward or simple because life is almost never
straightforward or simple. If it were, then wisdom and discernment
would not be required. We would simply do what is obvious. In the
real world, though, things are far more complex, which is why

-- 51 of 236 --

theology takes practice and develops over time. It’s not simply a way
of thinking but is rather an ongoing process in which one returns
time and again to a handful of intractable questions, asking them in
new ways and in light of new contexts, refusing to soften their
critical edge by pretending they could ever be easily resolved. Its
chief aim is not the production of “knowledge” per se, but the
development of our capacity to navigate the complexities of life in
robust and faithful ways. And just like any other lived practice, the
more we do it, the more it becomes a part of our body’s habituated,
unconscious, reflexive response to what we encounter in the various
niches we inhabit.
Speaking of the body, the role of the larger community (i.e., the
body of Christ) in developing these theological competencies cannot
be overstated. The fundamentally communal nature of the
theological task is especially salient for students of psychology
because they are learning not only how to see themselves and their
surroundings more clearly but also how to help others do the same.
In other words, there is no sense in which their growing capacity for
doing theology begins or ends with them alone. The same is true for
every person of faith. But given their calling to enter a helping
profession, students of psychology are preparing for a future in
which they will be located on the other side of the metaphorical
phoropter. One of their primary tasks in their role as psychological
practitioners will be to help their clients see the world more clearly
by having them look at themselves and the world around them from
a variety of different perspectives and asking the question: Which is
clearer? Number one or number two? Number three or number four?
The challenge, of course, is to do this while acknowledging that
none of us have 20/20 vision ourselves. In some ways we are the
blind leading the blind. Which is why, before responding, it is
imperative that clinicians not only listen to their clients as they
describe the way each lens sharpens or blurs their vision but also
that they listen well. Just because the moon appears to us like a
fuzzy glowing orb doesn’t mean that it looks the same to everyone
else. In other words, there is no such thing as a one-size-fits-all set
of prescription lenses, in large part because no one’s vision is

-- 52 of 236 --

impaired in exactly the same way. And just as it is with physical
sight, so it is with theological insight. Clarity of vision isn’t about
seeing what can already be seen, just with more depth and detail.
Rather, it’s about peering in and through the world that can be seen
in order to come into the presence of what cannot be seen. After all,
as Paul reminds us, “what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is
eternal” (2 Cor. 4:18 NIV).
Questions for Reflection and Discussion
1. How would you describe your current theological method—the
process by which you make sense of your life and the world as a
Christian?
2. What are the risks of the approach to constructive theology we
have outlined?
3. What does “culture” mean to you theologically? Psychologically?
Why does it matter how you answer these questions?
4. In what ways does psychology currently serve as a resource for
you as you engage the world theologically?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
Neff, Megan Anna, and Mark R. McMinn.
Embodying Integration: A Fresh
Look at Christianity in the Therapy Room. Downers Grove, IL: IVP
Academic, 2020.
Veeneman, Mary.
Introducing Theological Method: A Survey of
Contemporary Theologians and Approaches. Grand Rapids: Baker
Academic, 2017.
Volf, Miroslav, and Matthew Croasmun.
For the Life of the World: Theology
That Makes a Difference. Grand Rapids: Brazos, 2019.

-- 53 of 236 --

1. Hans-Georg Gadamer,
Truth and Method (New York: Continuum Books,
2004), xxi.
2. We are not the first to suggest that the phoropter might be a helpful
metaphor for theological reflection. See Caroline J. Simon,
Bringing Sex into
Focus: The Quest for Sexual Integrity (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 2012);
and Robert K. Johnson, Craig Detweiler, and Kutter Callaway,
Deep Focus: Film
and Theology in Dialogue (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2019).
3. Bernard Lonergan,
Method in Theology (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 1990), 1.
4. “A method is a normative pattern of recurrent and related operations
yielding cumulative and progressive results. There is a method, then, where
there are distinct operations, where each operation is related to the others,
where the set of relations forms a pattern, where the pattern is described as
the right way of doing the job, where operations in accord with the pattern
may be repeated indefinitely, and where the fruits of such repetition are, not
repetitious, but cumulative and progressive.” Lonergan,
Method in Theology, 4.
5. In terms of framing the theological task in this way, we are indebted to
William Dyrness,
Poetic Theology: God and the Poetics of Everyday Life (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans, 2011).
6. We are thus sympathetic to Miroslav Volf and Matthew Croasmun’s
definition of Christian constructive theology as “to discern, articulate, and
commend visions of flourishing life in light of God’s self-revelation in Jesus
Christ.”
For the Life of the World: Theology That Makes a Difference (Grand
Rapids: Brazos, 2019), 11.
7. An excellent example of how a constructive theological method precedes
the integrative gesture can be found in Steven J. Sandage and Jeannine K.
Brown,
Relational Integration of Psychology and Christian Theology: Theory,
Research, and Practice (New York: Routledge, 2018). Sandage and Brown
advocate for a “relational” approach to the integration of theology and
psychology, which not only takes place in particular contexts (and thus is not
the only way to do integration) but also is inherently collaborative (i.e., it
involves more than one scholar). Thus, for integration to be fully realized
according to a relational model, both the theologian and the psychologist must
come to the relationship not as incomplete halves but as whole human beings
(and scholars) who form and (in)form one another in a dynamic of mutual
reciprocity. Indeed, quoting Hal Foster, Sandage and Brown point out that “to
be interdisciplinary you need to be disciplinary first” (
Relational Integration,
90). In other words, “integration” assumes and, in an important respect,
depends on the prior formation of the scholar/practitioner in a particular
discipline, without which there would simply be nothing to integrate. Indeed,
as we stated in the introduction, one of the principal contentions of this book

-- 54 of 236 --

is that we are not putting forward radically novel ideas but that we are simply
theologians who are asking questions about how theology might inform
psychological research and practice.
8. Joel Green,
Body, Soul, and Human Life: The Nature of Humanity in the
Bible (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2008), 24–25.
9. Indeed, it was in part her dissatisfaction with the available approaches to
“integration” that prompted Megan Anna Neff to rethink both the purpose and
value of using the language of “integration” as a practicing psychologist.
Many of the traditional integration models and theories were built in the
height of modernity, and therefore focused on abstracted theoretical
models. As my classmates and I pondered what we were learning, one
question kept swirling around in our conversations: “Yes, but what does
this look like in the therapy room?” While we were learning important
content, it didn’t speak to the complexity we were witnessing or the
“boots on the ground” questions we had about the practical nature of the
clinical work we were learning to do. The class was successfully teaching
us integration (theories and models), but it wasn’t training us to
be
integrators. (Megan Anna Neff and Mark R. McMinn,
Embodying
Integration: A Fresh Look at Christianity in the Therapy Room [Downers
Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2020], 6–7, emphasis in original)
10. On this point, see Malcolm A. Jeeves and Thomas E. Ludwig,
Psychological Science and Christian Faith: Insights and Enrichments from
Constructive Dialogue (West Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press, 2018). For
those interested in how the historical development of psychology as a
“science” has impacted contemporary integration efforts, see Kenneth I.
Pargament’s discussion in
Spiritually Integrated Psychotherapy: Understanding
and Addressing the Sacred (New York: Guilford Press, 2007).
11. Thomas Kuhn,
The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1962).
12. Brad Strawn, Ronald W. Wright, and Paul Jones, “Tradition-Based
Integration: Illuminating the Stories and Practices That Shape Our Integrative
Imagination,”
Journal of Psychology and Christianity 33, no. 4 (2014): 300–
310.
13. For a helpful introduction to this way of thinking about Christian
theology, see Joshua Strahan,
The Basics of Christian Belief: Bible, Theology,
and Life’s Big Questions (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2020).
14. William Whitney and Carissa Dwiwardani expand on these ideas using an
“Integration Quadrilateral” in their forthcoming book,
The Integration of
Psychology and Christianity: A Student’s Guide (Downers Grove, IL: IVP
Academic).

-- 55 of 236 --

15. Warren S. Brown, “Resonance: A Model for Relating Science, Psychology,
and Faith,” in
Integrating Psychology and Theology: Research and Reflections,
ed. Al Dueck (Pasadena: Fuller Seminary Press), 293–313.
16. Simon,
Bringing Sex into Focus, 29.
17. Astute readers will recognize that we are describing a slightly modified
version of the Wesleyan Quadrilateral.
18. “Barth in Retirement,”
Time, May 31, 1963,
http://content.time.com/time/subscriber/article/0,33009,896838,00.html.
19. Alastair MacIntyre,
Whose Justice? Which Rationality? (Notre Dame, IN:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1988).
20. We have appropriated the phrase “reverse the hermeneutical flow” from
Craig Detweiler and Barry Taylor,
A Matrix of Meanings: Finding God in Popular
Culture (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2003), 319n5.
21. Hazel Rose Markus and Alana Conner,
Clash! How to Thrive in a
Multicultural World (New York: Plume, 2014), xix.
22. This quote is taken from Stephen Macedo, who wrote the introduction to
Boyd’s book and concisely summarizes Boyd’s definition of culture. Robert
Boyd,
A Different Kind of Animal: How Culture Transformed Our Species
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2018), 2.
23. Boyd,
Different Kind of Animal, 21.
24. Antonio Damasio,
The Strange Order of Things: Life, Feeling, and the
Making of Cultures (New York: Pantheon, 2018), 1.
25. We are indebted here to William A. Dyrness,
The Earth Is God’s: A
Theology of American Culture (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1997), xv.

-- 56 of 236 --

2
Creation as a Trinitarian Project
Key takeaways from this chapter:
The doctrine of creation provides the framework for theological
reflection on psychology.
God has created a world that can be explored and investigated.
The investigation and exploration of the created world by humans is
one of the ways that psychology can be understood from a
theological perspective.
Having its start in the 1940s, IKEA has grown from humble business
beginnings, where it originally sold things like pens and wallets, into
a superstore with locations all over the world. IKEA is primarily
known for its affordable, flat-packed furniture and maze-like stores.
You can go into IKEA needing to quickly grab a lamp, only to leave
six hours later with a hot dog in hand for dinner, a dresser, and a
date for Saturday night with someone you met in the bookshelf
section while trying to pronounce “Hemnes.” It is truly a special
place. And, if you’ve ever wondered where those names for IKEA
products come from, as I (William) have, they are named after
geographic areas of Norway, Sweden, or Denmark. For instance,
beds are often named for regions in Norway, sofa names bear a
resemblance to towns in Sweden, rugs derive their nomenclature
from areas in Denmark or Sweden, while other products are
Scandinavian women’s and men’s names.1

-- 57 of 236 --

My wife, Kim, is particularly talented at putting together IKEA
furniture. She has a system that has never failed yet—a skill forged
out of sheer necessity while a college student. Plus, she is
exceptionally good at following directions, which I have struggled
with since I was a child. First, she opens the box and finds the
directions. Then she organizes all the pieces according to the
different steps. Next, she opens all the plastic bags with the screws,
nuts, bolts, pegs, and other items (I’m sure these other items have
names, but I’ve never seen anything like them before). She lays out
every single one of these pieces in its entirety first and organizes
them by their numbers (if they have them). That way, even if the
connection pieces look similar, she knows exactly which ones are
which according to the numbers.
The next step she takes is to create the framework of the piece of
furniture, which is the first step in the instructions. This, as she’ll tell
you, is one of the most important parts of the job. She’ll also tell you
to be patient and not skip to the end, because if you don’t get the
framework part of the assembly correct the other parts won’t fit
right. Once she is confident that the framework is put together
properly, she goes ahead and moves forward by beginning slowly,
step by step, to attach the other pieces.
As can be seen with IKEA furniture, frameworks are important
because they provide the base that supports everything else. If you
want to get that dresser or bookshelf to look right and to sit flush
with the wall, then it’s important to pay close attention to getting the
framework correct before you move on. You can think of this chapter
on creation as the framework that supports a lot of other theological
doctrines for interdisciplinary work between theology and
psychology. The details will become more clear in this chapter, but,
in short, the triune God’s ordering of the world and ongoing
relationship with it is the framework that makes inquiry into the
world through science and psychology possible.
As mentioned in our previous chapter, one of the key goals of this
book is to help you as a psychology student to develop a greater
awareness of and competency with Christian theology. We are most
interested in helping you develop a greater depth of theological skill

-- 58 of 236 --

and reflection regarding psychology and psychological subdisciplines.
While the majority of our students come to us already interested in
theological reflection on the discipline of psychology, the common
question they often ask is, Where do I begin? This question is
important because, just like IKEA furniture, our beginning theological
reflections are a question about getting the framework right. In
answer to that question, we suggest that the basic place to begin
our theological reflection is within the framework of a trinitarian
account of God’s relations with the world.
God as Trinity (Father, Son, and Spirit) is not some sort of abstract
principle or speculative theory but a serious reflection on God’s
mission in the world through the Son and Spirit to bring wholeness
and healing to the created order. To make it more personal, when
we begin with a trinitarian account of God’s relations with the world,
we are also engaging in serious consideration of what it means for
us as the community of Christ to be a part of God’s mission and
vision.
God’s self-disclosure through the Son and Spirit in the created
world is the foundation, blueprint, or framework for how we can
begin to understand the backdrop to our own embodied lives. The
revealing of God’s self as trinitarian is an important part of this
framework for providing a vision for how our lives are transformed
through the person and work of Christ. The mission and vision of
God have an ultimate end or aim (Greek:
telos), which is to sustain,
redeem, and bring wholeness to humanity—and the entire creation.
As will become clear, our understanding of at least some of the
features that characterize this healing and wholeness can be guided
by the discipline of psychology. So, while we begin with the doctrine
of the Trinity, this chapter will argue that a trinitarian account of
creation and revelation sets the stage for how truths about the world
can be discovered through the discipline of psychology specifically
and science generally, and how knowledge about the world is
discovered through human interaction with the physical realm.
Understanding more about the doctrines of creation and revelation
is directly related to the question of how we can learn anything at all
from the human sciences. The doctrines of both creation and

-- 59 of 236 --

revelation impact our theological reflection about psychology, and
yet, they are doctrines that are often neglected by psychologists.
That the doctrines of creation and revelation have been overlooked
within psychology has not been intentional. It is simply that other
doctrines, such as those pertaining to theological anthropology and
the doctrine of sin, have oftentimes received more attention. The
primary theological doctrine that continues to be the focus in
psychology is the conception of the
imago Dei (image of God),2 and
much of the time that the
imago Dei is invoked, the discussion leans
toward the negative aspects of humanity related to sin.3 A focus on
the
imago Dei and sin makes sense considering that psychology
specifically studies human thought and behavior, and often focuses
on “abnormal” behavior or psychopathology.4 However, out of all the
Christian doctrines that are discussed in this book, the Christian
doctrines of creation and revelation provide some of the most critical
theological resources that enable us to have a more in-depth
understanding of clinical work and research within the field of
psychology.
Creation and Revelation
When we speak of creation and revelation, we are talking about two
related but different Christian doctrines. For understanding the term
“revelation,” we are talking about how God reveals God’s own self
through the Son and Spirit. When we use the term “creation” within
Christian theology, this concept is a bit trickier, since the majority of
students understand creation to refer to the Genesis narrative and
how God created the world in the beginning. While it is true that the
doctrine of creation does describe the beginnings of human and
nonhuman life in Genesis, for our purposes here, we must also think
of the Christian doctrine of creation as being a unifying theme that
operates throughout Scripture and describes God’s initial and
ongoing relationship with the world.5 The doctrine of creation does
form the framework for understanding God’s triune action through
the Son and Spirit in the created world since its inception. However,

-- 60 of 236 --

in addition to this, the doctrine of creation is part of the larger
Christian narrative that envisions the created world as the stage on
which God acts to create new things through the redeeming and
sanctifying work of Christ.6 Consequently, when we talk about a
trinitarian account of creation, we are saying something about how
the triune God created in the beginning and continues to provide for
both human and nonhuman life (like animals and plants) today. But
in our understanding of the doctrine, it also says something about
the ways that God reveals God’s own identity within Christ and the
Spirit.
By framing things in this way, several related theological topics rise
to the surface that call for further exploration. A trinitarian account
of creation does the following:
Encompasses other doctrines like providence and common grace
(terms we will return to later), both of which acknowledge that
God continues to uphold, care for, and sustain the world
Helps us understand how humans have a role in tending,
keeping, and stewarding the earth through all kinds of activities,
both aesthetic and scientific in nature
Upholds the goodness of creation and the human creature, and
maintains that the exploration of God’s creation through the
sciences or psychological science is a worthy endeavor
Offers a corrective to the physicalism or naturalism found within
some streams of psychology that reduces humanity to a series of
behavioral or neurological processes
Provides a vision for how creation one day will be made whole
and encompass a new heaven and a new earth (Rev. 21:1)
In sum, the created world is the stage where we experience the
triune God’s continuous and loving action of sustaining the world
that has been created, redeeming fallen humanity, and ultimately
bringing about the restoration of the entire created realm.7 The
world that God has created is able to be known; it is a world that

-- 61 of 236 --

can be explored and investigated, and this investigation and
exploration are ways that psychology can be understood, at least
from a theological perspective.
The rest of this chapter lays out how you might develop your
theological skills pertaining to the doctrines of creation and
revelation, and why these theological topics make a difference in
your practice, study, and research for psychology. The aim is to help
you more fully understand and explain (from a theological
perspective) why psychology is a worthwhile endeavor by developing
a greater awareness of and competency with a trinitarian
understanding of creation. But perhaps even more important, our
hope is that, as we discuss creation, you will begin to reflect on the
lived wisdom of how God interacts with the world and human
creatures and, in doing so, walk away changed—inspired by a vision
for how God might want you to pursue your calling within the
discipline of psychology.
Investigation into the Natural World and Human Nature
As authors who deeply believe in the benefit of engaging both
psychology and Christian theology in conversation, we understand
that there are some Christians who might not share our enthusiastic
engagement with these two disciplines. Two possible reasons for
these difficulties are that some Christians have either not reflected
on how God might be present and active in the world at large or
they hold religious and theological beliefs that make no room for
God to be at work in the wider culture outside of the church. As a
result, many Christians do not have an in-depth vision for how God’s
work in the world can incorporate discoveries in the sciences (even
though these same Christians still go to the doctor and believe what
their doctor says based on medical science). To counter such
misconceptions, we find that a trinitarian understanding of creation
provides the framework for how God allows elements of truth to be
discovered in the world through the psychological sciences. However,
we must acknowledge that some hesitations regarding psychology
are well founded, and we should address them before moving on.

-- 62 of 236 --

To begin, many areas of psychology operate with what we might
call a
methodological naturalism. Naturalism (at least in regard to
the study of human thought and behavior) is the belief that what we
can know about the human person can be explained through natural
causes, and science can ultimately and fully explain the cognitive,
emotional, and biological elements of human nature. Forms of
naturalism also reduce the created realm of both human and
nonhuman life to only biological, cognitive, and environmental
causes and processes, and do not acknowledge any nonmaterial
realities.
Physicalism is a related term, and it describes a view of the
human person as simply a sum of physical properties.
Scientism,
another associated concept, involves the belief that all things
ultimately can be explained through science or scientific
investigations of the natural world. According to scientism, if
something cannot be explained scientifically, then it is simply
because we don’t have the scientific understanding yet to explain it.
Scientism as a viewpoint will advocate that everything we observe in
the world ultimately has a natural or biological root for the
phenomena that we are observing that can be explained through
science.8
All these viewpoints ultimately have consequences for how we
understand both the world and the human person, which is why we
need to understand how they are functioning. More specifically,
these views have implications for understanding things like moral
behavior and epistemology (how we know what we know) in
addition to ontology (the nature of being). Methodological naturalism
within psychological research simply means that in the normal
scientific method used in psychology, the supernatural or spiritual
are bracketed out in order to find causal or correlational
mechanisms.
Naturalism and
physicalism are probably viewpoints that you are
already familiar with, even if the terminology might be new, since
they operate in the background of many views that are expressed
either explicitly or implicitly within the natural or human sciences.
For instance, in his work
What I Believe, the British philosopher

-- 63 of 236 --

Bertrand Russell famously stated, “When I die I shall rot, and
nothing of my ego will survive.”9 Sigmund Freud, in a similar way,
operated with a naturalistic view of the human person that reduced
conceptions of God to natural unconscious processes of the mind
that were a way for humans to find safety in a father figure. Of
course, this does not mean that Russell’s and Freud’s work can be
characterized only in this way or that we cannot appreciate other
aspects of their contributions to intellectual history. However, they do
provide prominent examples of how both naturalist and/or
physicalist understandings of the human person implicitly or
explicitly operate in the background of many accounts of humanity
from both psychology and philosophy.
Even if views of the human person are not explicitly stated as
clearly as Russell’s or Freud’s, we must admit that psychology
does
operate with a functional or methodological naturalism. That is,
psychologists are interested in understanding phenomena that fall
within the realm of the natural and scientific, and thus bracket out
any other kind of nonmaterial or supernatural causes.10 This is
perfectly normal and is the very nature of the scientific method that
we discussed in chapter 1. However, even while operating within the
bounds of the scientific method, psychology and other sciences are
sometimes portrayed as providing a total and complete picture of
human thought, behavior, and emotion—an understanding of the
human that can be explained by psychology or science alone.
Nevertheless, as Peter Hampson points out, even though this implicit
(or sometimes explicit) methodological naturalism does occur within
psychology, it does not follow that psychology can tell us everything
we need or want to know about human nature. Said another way,
psychology’s methodological naturalism does not mean that, as
Christians, we must subscribe to a comprehensive portrait of human
nature that is solely naturalistic.11
Consequently, we must acknowledge that psychological research
does at times seem to offer a portrait of human nature that operates
with this kind of methodological naturalism. However, as Christians,
because we believe that psychology alone cannot give a complete

-- 64 of 236 --

and comprehensive picture for human existence (ontology), we
should not reduce the human creature to biological, cognitive, or
emotional processes, as the assumption of naturalism in
psychological research sometimes implies. Although we do not deny
the reality of these natural processes and, for the most part, uphold
psychological research that explains and gives insight into these
processes, as Christians we believe that these processes were
created by God and are sustained by God’s life-giving Spirit. Keep in
mind that psychological science is limited to those things that can be
measured and observed within the natural realm, and while it offers
valuable insights, it cannot provide a complete ontology for the
ultimate goal or telos of humanity in the same way the Christian
theological tradition can. For the Christian who studies psychology,
what Scripture says about the human person and God’s interaction
with humanity provides the fundamental ontology (or primary lens)
through which we understand the nature and purpose of humanity.
Christian Scripture identifies a goal or purpose for humanity and,
in doing so, provides an orientation toward human personhood for
Christian psychologists—whether or not it is specified or explained
through their psychological research or clinical practice.
Psychologists who are also people of Christian faith thus seek to
clarify what God intends for the human creature and to discern how
the discipline of psychology might help illuminate these intentions. A
trinitarian understanding of creation informs how one might
understand the human person in ways that don’t necessarily have to
contradict psychological study but, in certain key instances, do
remain outside the realm of psychological inquiry.
For instance, psychologists might give us many reasons why we
should study human nature. Some of these reasons might include
things like improving the quality of human life and ensuring proper
development of infants, children, adolescents, and adults. Some
psychologists might say they study human nature simply because
human behavior is fascinating and worthy of investigation. All these
reasons are well and good, and as Christians we agree to a certain
degree. However, for the Christian who studies psychology, these
reasons for exploring human thought and behavior are not the only

-- 65 of 236 --

reasons why we should engage in psychological study. As Christians,
we also believe a fundamental starting point for the study of the
human person is the ultimate value and worth of humanity.
Theologically speaking, the human creature is granted dignity and
worth because humans are created by the triune God who loves and
cares for creation and who redeems creation through Jesus Christ.
This would be an example of how we might understand our study
within psychology to be
deepened and
broadened by our Christian
beliefs and values.12 God’s trinitarian action through Christ and the
Spirit in relation to the human creature is also an example of how
the Christian faith offers a “lived wisdom” that we talked about in
chapter 1. Our beliefs and values about humanity and God are not
just intellectual processes but are also embodied in an ethic
(concrete actions) that moves us to respect human life and to live
out this love for God and others through our studies within
psychology.
Some might still wonder whether it really does matter for our
studies within psychology that we operate with an underlying
Christian ontology that values the dignity and worth of humanity. In
short, the answer is yes, it does. In fact, it matters ultimately.
Whether you are pursuing a future in clinical or research psychology
(or both), the dignity and worth of humans is rooted in a theology of
creation. The value and worth of humanity outlined by a trinitarian
account of creation also empowers us to be justice-oriented in how
we speak up for the least of these (see Matt. 25:40–45) through our
research and clinical practice within psychology.
Creation as a Framework for Understanding
Psychological Science
Scripture gives us a clear vision of God ultimately moving and
working in the world around us. In addition, it tells story after story
of God inviting the community of Christ-followers (the church) to
carry out God’s work in the world. However, the biblical witness also
indicates that humans are capable of knowing truths about the world

-- 66 of 236 --

that aren’t necessarily found in the canon of Scripture. As
counterintuitive as that might sound, Christian theologians have
thought long and hard about this topic, and their deliberations are
quite helpful. Some of the ideas about how we can know truths
about the world that God makes available are through general and
special revelation, providence, and common grace.
General and Special Revelation
Theologians use the term “general revelation” to acknowledge that
God discloses God’s own self in the world, and at least some of this
disclosure is evident in creation through nature. This general
revelation of God does not necessarily provide or lead humanity to
salvation, but it does mean that if God created the world, then we
can expect to see God’s handiwork displayed in the very things that
God has created. There are some well-known Scriptures that
illustrate this sort of evidence; for example, “The heavens declare
the glory of God; the skies proclaim the work of his hands” (Ps. 19:1
NIV) and “For since the creation of the world God’s invisible qualities
—his eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen,
being understood from what has been made, so that people are
without excuse” (Rom. 1:20 NIV).
These passages demonstrate that at least some aspects of God
are seen in creation. Even in the beginning chapters of Genesis, God
promises to be faithful to all creation and sustain it through the
seasons and harvest (Gen. 8:21–23), thus establishing a general
covenant of care for the world (this is the basis of the doctrine of
providence). What we learn from general revelation is that God’s
relationship with the world continues unabated, and aspects of God’s
beauty, brilliance, wisdom, and order remain established for anyone
to see in and through their observations of the created order. Some
people might look at nature and see it only as a result of natural
processes, but as Christians, we understand that there is a God
behind those natural processes, and we often are moved with
gratitude to God for the beautiful features of the natural world.

-- 67 of 236 --

Special revelation similarly talks about God’s self-disclosure and
acknowledges that God is uniquely revealed in the person and work
of Jesus Christ and in the continuing work of the Spirit. Special
revelation also speaks to how the Spirit works through Scripture to
help people understand the person and work of Jesus Christ. For
those who grew up in some tradition of the Christian faith, special
revelation is probably the more familiar of the two terms, especially
insofar as it concerns the salvation and redemption made available
through the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus.
Theologians over time have talked about the “two books” of
knowledge given by God. The first book is generally thought to be
creation, whereas the second book is Scripture. In 1615 Galileo
argued that these two books cannot contradict each other, for they
both represent God’s communication to us.13 Oxford theologian and
scientist Alister McGrath similarly insists that the doctrine of creation
represents a unified understanding of knowledge and God’s
communication with us.14 What this means is that the created realm
and Scripture represent two related ways that one can know God,
with Scripture embodying a more full and clear knowledge about
God. For McGrath, there are not two different types of knowledge
about God, one derived through general revelation and one through
special revelation; rather, they are complementary modes of
communication by the same divine reality. Thus, our approach,
which is similar to McGrath’s and those of numerous other
theologians who have come before us, is to assume that if God
made the world, then it makes sense that aspects of God’s order,
creativity, and life would be found in the created realm.15
One of the most basic foundations for engaging in theologically
informed psychology is a unitary approach to knowledge that allows
for certain truths to be gleaned from psychology. This does not
mean that nature, the sciences in general, or psychology in
particular give us specific or special knowledge of Jesus Christ that
leads to redemption. However, it
does mean that aspects of God’s
order, creativity, and wisdom are disclosed in the basic building
blocks of the world. These indicators of who God is and how God

-- 68 of 236 --

operates can be discovered by those who inquire. What is more,
God’s very self—God’s presence—can be encountered in and through
our exploration of the world God created. Indeed, it is possible to
discover these things about God through psychological and clinical
science because, ultimately, God made it so.
Simon Oliver notes: “Genesis asks about the meaning of creation.
It begins with the same realization upon which the edifice of science
is built: the idea that the cosmos is ordered and rational in such a
way that we can make sense of it, not from some external objective
standpoint but from within the cosmos itself. We will see that
Genesis adds another crucial claim, which is more alien to our
scientific culture: creation is rational precisely because it is good.”16
Because God has fashioned the world in a certain kind of way, with a
certain kind of physical reality that is knowable, these realities can
be discovered through rigorous scientific investigation (both the
natural and behavioral sciences).
T. F. Torrance argues that nature may be “interpreted as pointing
intelligibly beyond itself to God,” but creation does not “permit any
necessary inferences from its contingence to God.”17 This simply
means that while aspects of creation (and the human person) are
knowable through scientific investigation, the physical world can only
speak about God in general terms and does not provide explicit
knowledge of the life, death, and resurrection of Christ.18 God did
not have to make a world that would disclose something of its order
to those who investigated it, but chose to graciously create a world
that humans could interact with, and, in some way, come to
understand through exploration. For Christians who study
psychology, there are truths that can be discovered about the
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors of human beings through clinical
practice and psychological science. While these truths from
psychology illuminate aspects of the wonder and complexity of
human personhood, this knowledge does not provide a full-bodied
understanding of the person and work of Christ. However, these
truths should not be discounted or disregarded as lacking in value.
In fact, it is just the opposite.

-- 69 of 236 --

In summary, and from a theological perspective, God reveals
aspects of who God is through the natural realm and Scripture.
While these aspects of nature and Scripture are related, special
revelation is clearer and more distinct than general revelation in the
way that it speaks specifically to the work of Christ. However,
general revelation concerns God’s creation of, sustenance of, and
ordering of the world. And while this order is complex, through
exploration and careful observation we are able to learn about this
world and the human person. The investigation of God’s created
realm can take many forms. We can explore it through travel,
literature, art and music, and the sciences. Likewise, by drawing on
the natural sciences or the social sciences, we can investigate the
beautiful complexity of the world God has created.
Parents get a lot of joy watching their children explore and play on
a playground or newly discovered beach. Children immerse
themselves in their surroundings while examining every nook and
cranny of their environment—finding features that adults will often
miss. In the same way, we can assume that it brings God great
delight to watch humans explore the vast playground of nature
through the sciences and arts. Here is what Dallas Willard suggests:
“God leads a very interesting life and is full of joy. . . . Undoubtedly
he is the most joyous being in the universe. . . . We pay a lot of
money to get a tank with a few tropical fish in it . . . but God has
seas full of them which he constantly enjoys.”19
Psychology is just one form that the delight-full exploration of
God’s world can take. The thoughts, behaviors, and feelings of
humans are certainly complex. An argument could be made that,
even when compared to what we know and do not know about the
physical laws that govern the universe, human psychology is one of
the most perplexing and uncharted terrains that scientists are
attempting to understand. However, as Christians, we believe that,
because God created the world with a certain order to it,
investigation into human thoughts, feelings, and behaviors can and
does yield results that will help us understand humanity. God created
humans to be curious about creation (and one another). Through

-- 70 of 236 --

cultural tools of investigation that humans have also discovered, we
can explore the physical realm through disciplines like physics and
biology and continue to learn about the human person through
disciplines like psychology and sociology. God has made creation in
such a way that it will “disclose” its secrets to the one who inquires,
which means that creation may be investigated and explored
through the sciences in general and psychology in particular.20
Returning to our opening metaphor, you’ll recall that the
instructions for putting together a piece of IKEA furniture usually
begin with a picture of what the final product looks like. This picture
of the final product is important, since it gives you an idea of what
things should look like and the goal you are striving to reach. So,
while the framework is the doctrine of creation, it is vital to
remember that theological reflection with psychology and theology
has a purpose or end goal. Moreover, as Christians studying
psychology, our work has a greater purpose or end goal (
telos)
beyond just amassing information about human thought and
behavior—or honing our research skills in order to get a job. The aim
of becoming a practitioner of psychology is not simply to have a
career or because we are enamored with the idea of seeing letters
after our name (e.g., PhD, PsyD, MFT, MSW, LPC). Hopefully, as
Christians, we are pursuing psychology as part of our vocational
calling to align ourselves with God’s mission in the world to bring
justice, wholeness, and peace to those we come into contact with,
through either our research or clinical practice.
As Megan Neff and Mark McMinn have pointed out, God by nature
is missional and is at work “mending and tending” the universe.21
Moreover, as the church, and as Christians who study psychology, we
are invited to participate in the missional nature of the triune God
through our vocation within psychology.22 As a consequence, we can
align ourselves with some of the missional activities of God through
our work within one of the subdisciplines of psychology, especially
given the fact that so much of the work we do within psychology is
concerned with the well-being and flourishing of human life. One
could even argue that, because psychology primarily concerns itself

-- 71 of 236 --

with human thought and behavior, it has a special place within the
sciences (from a theological perspective) as it examines the
relational and personal dimensions of humanity, which, according to
Scripture, is central in Christ’s work of redemption.
Providence and Common Grace
The theological vision of the created realm we have sketched so
far helps form the basis for how God works in and through the
human activity of psychology. Indeed, if the created realm did not
have a pattern or order, then the human enterprise of science or
psychology could not take place at all. But what about those who
aren’t already people of Christian faith? How can truths about the
natural world be discovered from scientists or psychologists who
aren’t necessarily Christians or even theists? Two other theological
terms help us here: providence and common grace.
After creating the world, God promises to be faithful to it and
sustain it through the seasons and harvest (Gen. 8:21–23). God’s
care for and active sustaining of the created order serves as the
basic theological understanding of providence. Although there is evil
present in the world, we are reminded in Job that if God withdrew
God’s Spirit, then all of humanity would perish (34:14–15). God’s
Spirit is the Spirit of Life—the One who moves within the created
world to uphold and sustain that which God has created. The Spirit
also works to move persons toward salvation, and as providential
provider to the created realm, God as creator speaks a continual
“yes” to life that sustains creation. As theologian David Fergusson
aptly puts it, “The determination of God to overcome evil and not to
abandon the project of creation is a persistent theme” in Scripture.23
God’s interaction with the world is continuous and ongoing, and the
doctrine of providence helps us give an account of the diversity of
actions that the Spirit takes to sustain the world.
The first way that we can understand providence is in God’s work
to restrain evil in the world. As Christians, we believe that, although
evil exists, God keeps evil at bay so that it is not as bad as it could
be. At the same time, as both Christians and psychologists, we

-- 72 of 236 --

should reject notions dismissing or diminishing the reality of evil as
something that is “not that bad.” Evil is evil, even if those in power
say that it is not. We can never dismiss the reality of pain in people’s
lives or invalidate the suffering that someone is currently
experiencing. There is no way to easily explain here why evil does
still exist, but the doctrine of providence provides an understanding
that God does work to restrain evil to some degree.
A second aspect of providence that is important to point out is the
way in which God allows goodness, truth, and beauty to still be
present in the world, and for good things to come to all people—
both for those who know God and for those who do not profess a
faith in God. As Jesus reminds us, God causes the sun to rise on the
evil and on the good and sends rain on both the righteous and the
unrighteous (Matt. 5:45). In this verse from Matthew, we see that
God’s blessings still fall on those who might not acknowledge God or
heed God’s commands. God not only upholds the life of human and
nonhuman creatures but also takes no pleasure in the death of even
the wicked (Ezek. 18:23). God works toward the flourishing and
well-being of creation, and although we might not recognize this
activity, it speaks to the generosity and hospitality of God that is
frequently present in our lives.
A third component of providence concerns how God works to
allow truths about the world to be discovered by both Christians and
non-Christians. This is a natural extension of the point above—
namely, that God allows good things to be given to all human life—
and some of this goodness is how God allows humanity to explore,
discover, tend, and develop the created world that God has made.
Theologians in the tradition of Abraham Kuyper have referred to
these elements of God’s truth being evident in the wider culture as
common grace. Common grace is God’s movement through the Son
and Spirit to develop human culture and promote human flourishing
even though sin is still present.24 In short, God does not create a
world and then step away and leave creation on its own. God
graciously reaches out to creation, sustaining and perfecting the

-- 73 of 236 --

created order, allowing humanity to discover elements of creation
through art, science, culture, and, yes, psychology.
In addition to the idea of common grace found in the Reformed
tradition and in the writings of theologians shaped by Kuyper, we
also find helpful the Wesleyan notion of prevenient grace, which
overlaps with common grace to some degree. Both “common grace”
and “prevenient grace” are theological terms that describe how
aspects of goodness, beauty, and truth are present in the world
despite the reality of sin. There is a difference among the Reformed
and Wesleyan traditions concerning how (or whether) this grace
leads to salvation.25 Within the Reformed tradition, common grace
does not lead to salvation, whereas in the Wesleyan tradition,
prevenient grace is the working in someone’s life that occurs before
conversion that does help lead someone to salvation. However, in
the Wesleyan tradition, prevenient grace does not always lead to
salvation since it can be ignored or resisted. Although they differ
slightly, the important point to keep in mind here is that both
theological traditions provide the necessary resources for
understanding how truth can be discerned while sin is still present.
Sin does disrupt the ordering of God’s creation—within the human
heart and in the structures and cultures of society—but it does not
destroy God’s good creation entirely, much less ultimately. God is
committed to ensuring that sin does not have the final word
regarding human and nonhuman creation, and the fullest
manifestations of this commitment are the person and work of Jesus
Christ and the perfecting actions of the Spirit.26
Kuyper’s notion of discovery and development is particularly
helpful for understanding the work of psychology. Certain
dimensions of the created world can be
discovered through the
enterprise of science or psychology, and these discoveries can also
be
developed as a part of human culture. As Kuyper states, “The life
of the world is to be honored in its independence, and . . . we must,
in every domain, discover the treasures and develop the potencies
hidden by God in nature and in human life.”27 For Kuyper, because
humans stand in a certain relation with the world, they have the

-- 74 of 236 --

ability to discover the treasures of creation and to develop these
patterns found in creation.
Providence and common grace serve as two points of theological
reflection that are critical for students of psychology and Christianity,
in large part because they remind us that there are truths to be
learned from the study of the human creature (
discovery), and that,
as humans make meaning of these truths, they
develop a culture
around these discoveries in the form of bodies of knowledge within
psychological science. God has given humans a natural curiosity
about the world around them (think about how Jean Piaget referred
to children as “little scientists”), and in this curiosity we have a
propensity for and are drawn toward social interaction with other
humans. It also makes sense that some of this curiosity manifests
itself in a basic curiosity about other humans and a desire to study
these complex creatures through something like psychology (e.g.,
psychology is often one of the largest majors on university campuses
in the United States).
Al Wolters’s work
Creation Regained offers a similar reappraisal of
Kuyper but uses the terms “structure” and “direction.”28 Creation
provides a
structure (a form or certain degree of order) that enables
the natural world to be studied, but it is up to the humans working
in culture to give these discoveries a
direction. For Wolters, the
Christian is charged with directing their discoveries to the working of
the kingdom, in whatever domain of study a person might find
themselves.29 From the perspective of a trinitarian account of
creation, the Spirit is the one who makes things what they are
intended to be. This can be seen in the realms of culture as humans
have the potential to give further order to what is found in the
created realm, and the sciences and the arts are examples of how
humans further shape and give expression to what is encountered in
the natural world. Understood from the perspective of providence, it
is the Spirit who guides human effort in this creative and directive
process. There is something good about the created world, and
there is something equally good when humans use their talents and

-- 75 of 236 --

creative capacities to learn about psychology by engaging with the
world that God has created.
Giving Creation a Voice
Humans have a special role within the world of discovering and
developing the created realm through the psychological sciences,
and this is a natural and good use of the gifts that God has given us.
Creation has an order that can be discerned, but because it speaks
in terms that are often vague and ambiguous, it is left up to humans
as agents or stewards of creation to articulate the wonders of the
created order through their various endeavors. Whether plowing a
farm, painting a work of art, performing research on human
behavior, or exploring human nature and behavior through clinical
work, humans are shaping the world. We are not the first to suggest
that truth can be discovered through psychology, but there has been
limited discussion regarding how psychology as a discovery-oriented
enterprise contributes to God’s mandate of not only developing or
fashioning the earth but also giving creation a voice.30
This approach to creation suggests that truth may be discovered
and human life informed and nourished from sources that are not
explicitly theological, such as psychology. For example, psychology
provides us with a means for articulating the various forms and
structures of human thought, feelings, and behavior found in
creation. In fact, it becomes increasingly difficult to understand how
psychology might contribute to our knowledge and understanding of
the world if we operate with a theology that does not affirm that
part of our stewardship role is to develop the created realm through
psychological discoveries. At its most basic, psychology is the
exploration of the human person and behavior, but it can also be
understood theologically as fulfilling our task as human creatures in
exploring, developing, and shaping creation in a particular way. God
has created humans with the ability to explore, wonder, dream
about, and develop creation, and psychology provides us with a
unique opportunity for doing so. Because God has ordered the world

-- 76 of 236 --

in such a way that it is knowable to the one who investigates and
explores, the created realm presents a reality that has an intrinsic
logic. Thus, psychological scientists are right to assume that there
are forms or patterns in the natural order that can be investigated
and that psychological research not only helps discover truths about
the created realm but also helps develop these truths.
All told, interactions with the material world are a necessary part
of being human. Our physical world shapes and orients the
cognitive, social, and emotional dimensions of personhood, which
means that what happens to and within the created world ultimately
has significance for the ways that we become persons.31 Because
the world is unified and ordered in a certain way, humans have been
given the ability to investigate and explore the patterns found in
creation and ultimately to give articulation to the order and patterns
that are found regarding human thought and behavior. At the same
time, human personhood is also shaped by the world that we inhabit
through discoveries and development. What is more, these
discoveries hold the potential for being developed and directed in
certain ways, and for the Christian, these developments are offered
up for the ultimate glory of God’s kingdom. While not all theories in
psychology entirely align with the Christian gospel, one can still
conceive of psychology as part of the human exploration of the
created order that God has established.
Questions for Reflection and Discussion
1. What have you discovered in your own psychological studies that
has allowed you to know more about God’s creation (human or
nonhuman)?
2. What are some of the ways you might be able to direct creation
in and through your studies and work as a psychologist?

-- 77 of 236 --

3. What are the benefits of seeing the contributions of non-
Christians in terms of common grace? What might the
drawbacks be?
4. Much of the discussion has focused on general revelation and
common grace. How might the Christian concept of special
revelation expand or develop what we find in and through the
psychological sciences?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
Fergusson, David.
Creation. Guides to Theology. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
2014.
LaCugna, Catherine Mowry.
God for Us: The Trinity and Christian Life. San
Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1991.
Moltmann, Jürgen.
God in Creation: A New Theology of Creation and the
Spirit of God. Minneapolis: Fortress, 1993.
Portions of this chapter have been adapted from William Whitney, “Beginnings:
Why the Doctrine of Creation Matters for the Integration of Psychology and
Christianity,”
Journal of Psychology and Theology 48, no. 1 (2020): 44–65,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0091647119837024.
1. Morgan Cutolo, “How IKEA Products Get Their Crazy-Sounding Names,”
Reader’s Digest, Dec. 28, 2017, https://www.rd.com/article/ikea-product-
names; Sarah Wyman, “Ikea’s Furniture Names Are Famous for Being Hard to
Pronounce, but They Aren’t Completely Random. Here’s Where They Come
From,”
Business Insider, Aug. 23, 2018, https://www.businessinsider.com/ikea-
furniture-names-origin-story-2018-8.
2. Keith A. Puffer, “Essential Biblical Assumptions about Human Nature: A
Modest Proposal,”
Journal of Psychology and Christianity 26, no. 1 (2007): 45–
56.
3. David N. Entwistle and Stephen K. Moroney, “Integrative Perspectives on
Human Flourishing: The
Imago Dei and Positive Psychology,”
Journal of
Psychology and Theology 39, no. 4 (2011): 295–303.

-- 78 of 236 --

4. Such is the common argument put forward by several authors in Corey L.
M. Keyes and Jonathan Haidt, eds.,
Flourishing: Positive Psychology and the
Life Well-Lived (Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2003).
5. Pamela Ebstyne King and William B. Whitney, “What’s the ‘Positive’ in
Positive Psychology? Teleological Considerations Based on Creation and
Imago
Doctrines,”
Journal of Psychology and Theology 43, no. 1 (2015): 47–59.
6. King and Whitney, “What’s the ‘Positive’ in Positive Psychology?,” 47.
7. King and Whitney, “What’s the ‘Positive’ in Positive Psychology?,” 48.
8. Philosophers make the distinction between “epistemological naturalism”
and “metaphysical naturalism.” For the sake of our general overview, we have
described both under the term “naturalism.” For the nuances, see D. Gene
Witmer, “Physicalism and Metaphysical Naturalism,” Oxford Bibliographies,
March 30, 2015, https://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo-
9780195396577/obo-9780195396577-0258.xml.
9. Bertrand Russell,
Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell, 1903–1959, ed.
Robert E. Egner and Lester E. Denonn (New York: Routledge, 1992), 370.
10. Peter Hampson, “Theology and Psychology,” in
Christianity and the
Disciplines: The Transformation of the University, ed. Oliver Crisp, Gavin
D’Costa, Mervyn Davies, and Peter Hampson (London: Bloomsbury, 2014),
119.
11. Hampson, “Theology and Psychology,” in
Christianity and the Disciplines,
120.
12. William Whitney and Carissa Dwiwardani,
A Student’s Guide to
Psychology and Christianity (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, forthcoming).
13. Richard J. Blackwell,
Galileo, Bellarmine and the Bible (Notre Dame:
University of Notre Dame Press, 1991), 20–22.
14. Alister McGrath,
A Scientific Theology (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2009),
1:257.
15. Joel Green,
Body, Soul, and Human Life: The Nature of Humanity in the
Bible (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2008), 257.
16. Simon Oliver,
Creation: A Guide for the Perplexed (London: Bloomsbury,
2017), 8.
17. Thomas F. Torrance,
Space, Time, and Incarnation (Edinburgh: T&T
Clark, 1997), 62.
18. Thomas F. Torrance,
Reality and Evangelical Theology: The Realism of
Christian Revelation (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 1999), 12–13.
19. Dallas Willard,
The Divine Conspiracy: Rediscovering Our Hidden Life in
God (New York: HarperCollins, 1998), 62–63.
20. Torrance,
Space, Time, and Incarnation, 2.
21. Megan Anna Neff and Mark R. McMinn,
Embodying Integration: A Fresh
Look at Christianity in the Therapy Room (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic,

-- 79 of 236 --

2020), 163.
22. Neff and McMinn,
Embodying Integration, 163.
23. David Fergusson,
The Providence of God: A Polyphonic Approach,
Current Issues in Theology (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2019), 22.
24. Lydia Kim-van Daalen, “The Holy Spirit, Common Grace, and Secular
Psychotherapy,”
Journal of Psychology and Theology 40, no. 3 (2012): 229–39.
25. L. G. Cox, “Prevenient Grace: A Wesleyan View,”
Journal of the
Evangelical Theological Society 12, no. 3 (1969): 143.
26. See Colin E. Gunton,
The Promise of Trinitarian Theology, 2nd ed.
(London: T&T Clark, 2003).
27. Abraham Kuyper,
Lectures on Calvinism (Peabody, MA: Hendrickson,
2008), 31.
28. Albert M. Wolters,
Creation Regained: Biblical Basics for a Reformational
Worldview (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2005), 10.
29. Wolters,
Creation Regained, 11–12.
30. Jeremy Begbie,
Voicing Creation’s Praise: Towards a Theology of the Arts
(Edinburgh: T&T Clark, 1991).
31. For a compelling take on how our physical environs constitute us as the
physical creatures we are, see Warren S. Brown and Brad D. Strawn,
The
Physical Nature of Christian Life: Neuroscience, Psychology, and the Church
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012).

-- 80 of 236 --

3
God’s Wider Presence
Key takeaways from this chapter:
Psychological practitioners are helped by a broader notion of God’s
presence in the world.
The Spirit of God is present and active outside the church and
without reference to Jesus Christ.
The Spirit is not a disembodied ghost but the divine breath of life.
God is actively involved in our colleagues’ and clients’ lives long
before and long after our own involvement.
Meet John. He’s eighteen years old. He can be sarcastic,
temperamental, and disengaged at times, but, just as often, he’s
inquisitive, kind, and self-reflective. He plans on going to college at
some point in the future, but he really isn’t interested in taking on
the kind of student debt he’s heard so much about. In the
meantime, he’s pretty content working at a local coffee shop and
playing bass with the band he formed with his friends from high
school.
Like many in his generational cohort, John also lives with a base
level of anxiety that manifests itself in semi-frequent bouts of
depression. It’s not that he hates his life or can’t recognize how, as a
middle-class White kid from the suburbs, his problems are
qualitatively different than most of the humans on the planet. If
anything, that’s part of the problem. On the surface, it doesn’t
appear that he would have much to fret about, and he knows it, but

-- 81 of 236 --

he can’t seem to shake the pervasive sense of dread that serves as
the backdrop for his every waking moment.
Because it’s Tuesday, John is your first client of the day. Scanning
through your files in preparation for your time together, you are
reminded that, like an increasing number of his contemporaries,
John is a religious “none.” He doesn’t identify with any religious
tradition and never really has. He was raised in a nonreligious home,
and while he isn’t antagonistic toward any specific religion or people
of faith in general, religion has no bearing on his daily life—at least
not in any significant way. If pressed, John would probably say that
he just doesn’t see what the fuss is all about. Religious beliefs and
practices are less than irrelevant to him. They are simply beside the
point.
John is not an outlier. In fact, as you sit knee-to-knee with him on
this Tuesday morning, you realize that most of your clients, whether
they profess some kind of religious faith or not, share a profile
similar to John. Unlike John, they may identify as Christian and even
engage in some of the more formal practices that being a Christian
often entails (e.g., church attendance, financial giving, and
observance of certain holidays). But for all intents and purposes, this
identity has no real purchase on the way they live, much less how
they understand their lives. Even those whose Christian faith is
central to their identity come to you first and foremost for
psychotherapy and not pastoral counseling, so they have no real
expectation that religion would or should come into play.
Recognizing that this kind of religious diversity is part of what
makes US society so rich and textured, the American Psychological
Association code of ethics has made it clear that, regardless of a
client’s religious commitments (or lack thereof), psychologists are to
be “aware of and respect cultural, individual and role differences,
including those based on . . . religion . . . and consider these factors
when working with members of such groups.” At the same time, “In
their work-related activities, psychologists do not engage in unfair
discrimination based on . . . religion . . . or any basis proscribed by
law.”1 In other words, although psychologists must be sensitive to

-- 82 of 236 --

the various ways in which religion and spirituality might be
functioning in a client’s life, it would never be appropriate for
therapists to impose their beliefs and values on clients, or to provide
differential treatment to individuals who may not subscribe to those
same beliefs and values.
In some respects, formal codes of conduct like these make things
fairly straightforward. It can often be helpful for therapists to know
exactly what to do when attempting to navigate real-world
complexities. If a client wants to talk about their religion or
spirituality, great. If not, no problem. In fact, even though it’s
perfectly understandable for clients to turn to their therapist for
guidance on matters of faith, they are likely to be disappointed when
they do. After all, clinical psychologists are trained in forms of
psychotherapy and not in theology. Only in rare cases are they also
members of the clergy.2
Complicating matters, however, is the way in which formal codes
of conduct, although at times helpful, can mask (and perhaps even
sublimate) much deeper issues. As Kenneth Pargament has pointed
out, contemporary models of psychotherapy have inherited a deep
suspicion regarding religion and spirituality from the psychological
paradigms that emerged during the twentieth century, most notably
behaviorism and psychoanalysis.3 According to Pargament, this
disciplinary skepticism—and, at times, outright hostility—has
generated thin and superficial notions of religious faith among many
(if not most) psychotherapists in practice today. What is more,
because the great majority of psychology programs in the United
States provide virtually no training in religion or spirituality,
graduates of these programs are largely unprepared to help, much
less understand, clients whose religious life and practice are central
to their identity.4 Nevertheless, regardless of the gaps in their
training or their personal convictions, APA guidelines stipulate that
therapists must address their clients’ religious and spiritual concerns
in the midst of psychotherapy when appropriate.5 It is in part for this
very reason that psychologists like David A. Steere have advocated

-- 83 of 236 --

strongly for all mental health workers—from psychotherapists,
psychologists, and psychiatrists, to social workers, pastoral
counselors, and nurses—to accommodate a spiritual dimension in
their work.6
To be sure, these are significant challenges for anyone studying to
become a clinical psychologist, but students of Christian faith face an
even larger and more pressing question from the start—one that is
distinctly theological. Namely, in what sense does their work as
mental health professionals relate to the ongoing presence and
activity of God in the world? Do their current studies or their future
roles in the field of psychology have anything to do with the ways in
which God is involved in their own lives, or are these wholly separate
projects that, for necessary reasons, need to be kept free from all
things theological? As it concerns a client like John, in what ways (if
any) might God be involved in
his journey toward healing and
mental health? For that matter, what does it look like for any of us to
participate faithfully in what God is doing in our clients’ lives, even in
those cases when the topics of faith, spirituality, and/or religion are,
for good reason, never broached?
In our estimation, the only way to answer these questions without
throwing our hands up and concluding that the realms of psychology
and theology should remain wholly distinct is to develop a much
broader and more generous notion of God’s presence.7 In fact, a
more robust pneumatology (i.e., a doctrine of the Spirit) is critical for
recognizing and affirming the ways in which humans are able to
collaborate with God’s activity in the broader world, especially in
domains (e.g., the therapeutic context) that are not explicitly
Christian, religious, or even theistic. While the doctrine of creation
provides a foundation for conceptualizing the relationship between
psychology and the Christian faith, pneumatology is the doctrine that
can help students of psychology recognize how God’s action is
carried out through human involvement in clinical and research
psychology.
In this chapter, then, we develop a biblically grounded
pneumatology that conceives of the Spirit primarily in terms of the

-- 84 of 236 --

presence and ongoing activity of God’s Spirit in the world, and not
merely as the Spirit of Christ and his church. In doing so, we will ask
two basic questions: What is God up to? and How do we join in?8
A God without Borders
In the previous chapter, we briefly considered a handful of distinct
but overlapping theological concepts: general revelation, common
grace, and natural theology. These are related topics, to be sure,
and they each provide a slightly different way of thinking not only
about how God discloses Godself in and through the natural realm
but also about how God structures, orders, and actively upholds the
whole of the created order. Indeed, one of our operating
assumptions is that the self-disclosure of the trinitarian God in
creation is not simply an interesting aside to the “real” truth we find
in Scripture but rather serves as the necessary condition for humans
to discover anything at all about God’s wisdom, beauty, and
creativity in their exploration of the world we inhabit. Without any
risk of overstatement, none of the claims we are advancing in this
book regarding the theological significance of the psychological
sciences hold up without a well-rounded conception of the trinitarian
God revealing Godself in and through the created order.
However, we also noted that, depending on the historical and
denominational context in which it was discussed, each concept has
proven to be somewhat problematic. For example, motivated by
their commitment to
sola Scriptura, theologians in the Reformed
tradition have explored at great length the numerous occasions in
which the biblical witness points toward God’s revelatory work in the
world.9 Yet, more often than not, these theologians have tended to
understand this mode of God’s revelation as a “cup half empty.”10
When compared to the special revelation found in Scripture and the
person and work of Jesus Christ, the knowledge of God that is
disclosed through general revelation is thought to be at best
ambiguous, vague, and inchoate, and at worst, prone to distortion
and abuse by a sin-scarred humanity.11 For many, the distorting

-- 85 of 236 --

effects of human sin are simply too great a hurdle to overcome,
which means that the primary function of general revelation is to
prepare people to receive the more complete, saving knowledge of
God in Christ. From this perspective, general revelation can do little
more than reveal to humans that they are without excuse for
denying that which creation has routinely made clear to them (Rom.
1:20) and thus stand condemned before a righteous God.
In addition to this pervasive skepticism regarding the human
capacity to deduce any kind of reliable or trustworthy knowledge
about God from the created order, some theologians have also raised
legitimate concerns about whether the doctrine of general revelation
involves God at all. The reason Karl Barth said “
Nein!” so forcefully
to the natural theology espoused by his fellow German theologians
was not because he had a limited vision of how God worked in the
world but because he was wary of any theological project that would
suggest humans could, through unaided reason or by simply
observing the natural order, arrive at any kind of knowledge of
God.12 For it to be revelation, said Barth, something more than mere
human curiosity needs to be in play. Only God can reveal Godself. To
suggest otherwise runs the risk of humans “discovering” a God who
looks an awful lot like a projection of themselves.13
Although we don’t share all the concerns our theological forebears
articulated, we highlight them in order to situate our understanding
of God’s wider presence14 within the historic theological tradition.
For example, we agree with the Reformed theologians that sin
clouds our vision and that its distorting effects should not be taken
lightly. But just because we see “through a glass darkly” does not
mean that we should automatically distrust, discount, or devalue the
truths we discover in and through our encounter with the world. If
this were the case, then neither should we trust the truths we
encounter in Scripture, for they too are filtered through our sin-
marred faculties. In our present state, sin is of course a given, but to
borrow a phrase from Emil Brunner, there remains a “point of
contact” between God and humanity.15

-- 86 of 236 --

This point of contact is more than a mere interface by which
theological knowledge is transmitted. Rather, it implies the coming
together of two subjects or, in the words of Martin Buber, an “I-
Thou” encounter.16 To speak of God’s wider presence in this way is
to shift the frame of reference from what humans know
about God
to the means by which humans come to
know God personally. It is
to acknowledge that, as the Third Person of the Trinity, the Spirit of
God is always already present and active in human life, meeting
people in the midst of concrete, lived situations. Just as Barth
suggested, there simply is no sense in which humans, through their
own efforts, could ever attain a knowledge of God without God’s
ongoing involvement in their various pursuits. But in contrast to
Barth, our operating assumption is that the Spirit of God is
pervasively present in the world rather than standing at an “infinite
qualitative distance” from humanity, which means that God is not
simply waiting around passively for humans to discover some
generic set of divine attributes through unaided human reason.17
The Spirit of God is actively calling human creatures to participate as
co-laborers in God’s creative project, inviting them to “search for
God and perhaps grope around for him and find him” (Acts 17:27).
These key differences notwithstanding, we remain fully in line with
the broader Protestant tradition in our commitment to a biblically
grounded understanding of the Spirit’s wider presence. Indeed, this
commitment to grappling with the biblical text and its testimony to
God’s common grace is perhaps one of the Reformed tradition’s
greatest contributions to contemporary constructive theology. For,
more so than any other source, it is the biblical witness that not only
calls into question any overly narrow or restrictive view of God’s
work in the world but also challenges us to take seriously the variety
of ways in which God is very much present and active outside the
church and without reference to Jesus Christ.
Although space will not permit an exhaustive account of the
biblical data, we can identify at least three domains in which God
reveals Godself in Scripture, each of which has been outlined by
Robert K. Johnston in
God’s Wider Presence:

-- 87 of 236 --

It is my contention that God’s wider revelation is not something that is
available to all humanity through the
imago Dei based on our human
capacity. Rather, with [Karl] Barth, we must say, first, that revelation
always needs the Spirit as Revealer—it is event. Secondly, with [Friedrich]
Schleiermacher, general revelation is not first of all accessible because of
our rationality, but rather is rooted in that intuition of Something or
Someone beyond us and our feeling that results from this encounter. And
third, with [C. S.] Lewis . . . general revelation is not merely a trace,
something largely insignificant given Christ or incomprehensible because
of our sin, but the experience of the wider Presence of God through his
Spirit mediated through
creation, conscience, and
human culture.18
Creation, conscience, and human culture: let us turn briefly to each
of these modes by which the Spirit is present in our lives before
considering what it might look like to participate with the Spirit in
and through the work of clinical psychology.
Creation
From the book of Job (32:8) to various psalms (8:3–4; 19:1–6;
93:3; 97:6) to the stories found in the Acts of the Apostles (14:15–
17; 17:24–28) to the opening chapters of Romans (1:18–20),
Scripture is filled with references to God’s revelatory presence
mediated through nature and the created order more generally.
When the “heavens declare the glory of God” (Ps. 19:1 NIV), or
when the psalmist looks to the heavens and sees “the work of
[God’s] fingers” (Ps. 8:3 NIV), no caveat is provided. There is no
suggestion by the biblical authors nor is there anything about the
narrative context of these passages that would indicate the
knowledge creation provides regarding God’s creative work is
incomplete or inadequate. Its function is not merely to “prepare”
humans to receive a more complete form of revelation; rather, the
Spirit’s pervasive presence in nature is simply a given. Thus, the
divine
ruach (i.e., spirit) hovering over the watery abyss during
creation (Gen. 1:2) is the same Spirit who actively sustains and
upholds God’s ongoing creative project. Nothing is more
fundamental. For the biblical authors, the Spirit of God constitutes
material reality itself.

-- 88 of 236 --

Conscience
In addition to the heavens and earth proclaiming the work of God,
the biblical text also indicates that God is actively present in the
human heart, even among those who are neither part of the
covenant community nor privy to the special revelation found in the
person of Christ. For instance, according to the apostle Paul, “When
Gentiles, who do not possess the law, do instinctively what the law
requires, these, though not having the law, are a law to themselves.
They show that what the law requires is written on their hearts, to
which their own conscience also bears witness; and their conflicting
thoughts will accuse or perhaps excuse them on the day when,
according to my gospel, God, through Jesus Christ, will judge the
secret thoughts of all” (Rom. 2:14–16 NRSV).
There is far too much in these few verses to fully unpack here.
What we can say is that Paul’s larger argument in Romans
underscores the fact that all have sinned—everyone. No one,
whether Jew or gentile, is worthy of God’s unmerited grace. But
within that argument, in which we are all sinners, Paul is both
honest and humble enough to say that some of us who know God
and fail to do God’s will are put to shame by those who don’t have
God’s special revelation. They may not have any knowledge of Jesus
or the law, but they nonetheless act consistent with God’s revelation.
What the law requires is “written on their hearts,” and their
conscience bears witness to this reality. Paul’s point is not that we
don’t need Jesus or that special revelation is not essential. His point
is rather that people outside the covenant community of Israel and
outside the Christian faith can and do know God’s will and, more
important, they do it. To borrow a turn of phrase from biblical
scholar Robert Jewett, these “righteous Gentiles” are able to sense
and discern what God has written on their hearts and to respond
appropriately.19 Another way to put it is that they are respond-able
to the presence and activity of the Spirit of God. And according to
Paul, somehow, and in some way, they will be accused or excused
based on how they respond when the Spirit pricks their conscience.

-- 89 of 236 --

Culture
One of the distinguishing marks of what it means to be human is
that we are culture-makers through and through. As evolutionary
psychologists frequently remind us, it’s almost as if we cannot help
but make something of the world we inhabit. Humans construct the
very niches that, in turn, form and inform our development as
individuals and as a species.20 Theologically speaking, this stands to
reason. Not only do humans “image” the Creator through their
creative projects, but their culture-making activity serves as one of
the primary means by which they are able to collaborate with God’s
creative project. In an important sense, God created humans to be
not simply managers of creation but cocreators, ascribing to them
the task of being “fruitful,” multiplying, and filling the created order
(Gen. 1:28). Known as the cultural mandate, humans are to “till” the
soil and “keep” it, that is, to cultivate it (Gen. 2:15 NRSV). As visual
artist Makoto Fujimura says so eloquently in his book
Culture Care,
“Culture is not a territory to be won or lost but a resource we are
called to steward with care. Culture is a garden to be cultivated.”21
When located within a larger theological framework of God’s
revelatory presence, human culture-making serves as an occasion in
which God is not only present but actively collaborates with humans.
In Exodus, it is the Spirit of God who fills the artisans and craftsmen
responsible for both the construction and adornment of the
tabernacle (Exod. 31:1–11; 36:8–13). But it is not merely artists in
the covenant community who are in-spirited in this way. As Paul
points out in his speech on the Areopagus, the same Spirit who filled
the artisans building the tabernacle is the One who also inspired the
Greek poets to create art that reflected the truth of God’s pervasive
presence: “In him we live and move and have our being” (Acts
17:28 NRSV). Rather than focus on how this poetry could only ever
deliver “partial” knowledge about God or how the Athenians’ minds
were distorted by sin, Paul points out the ways in which the Spirit of
God is already present and active in their creative works, even when
those works of art were produced in a cultural context that knew
nothing of the person and work of Jesus Christ or the God of Israel.

-- 90 of 236 --

Not all biblical scholars agree that Paul was uncritically endorsing
this Greek poetry. Nevertheless, there is no escaping the fact that
now we have a series of cultural artifacts (i.e., poems), produced by
non-Christian authors, included in the Christian canon as a
testament to God’s reality-encompassing presence (e.g., Acts 17:18).
More to the point, though, by adopting this kind of posture toward a
pre-Christian culture, Paul’s approach serves as a helpful model for
anyone hoping to participate in what the Spirit is up to in
contemporary, post-Christian societies.
The Breath of God
We have only scratched the surface of the biblical evidence here, but
there is plenty to reinforce the claim that the Spirit of God is indeed
present and active far beyond the walls of the church and in places
where the name of Jesus is never uttered. Still, even if we accept
this basic premise as the starting point for a more robust
pneumatology, the question remains as to what it would look like to
contribute to or participate in the Spirit’s ongoing project in the
world. It is a question that of course pertains to every person of
faith, no matter what their individual vocation happens to be. As the
cultural mandate of Genesis suggests, we have all been entrusted
with the task of co-laboring with God, called to cultivate our
particular corner of the garden in such a way that it bears life.
However, given that clinical psychologists and psychological
scientists often operate in domains that, for legal and ethical
reasons, are devoid of any explicitly Christian references, the
question of how this kind of work contributes to the Spirit’s work is
particularly critical for students of psychology to consider.
For anyone whose imagination has been shaped by the Western
intellectual tradition, the idea that humans might interact with any
“spirit,” much less the Spirit of God, may present certain difficulties,
but this need not be the case. In contrast to the Latin
spiritus or the
German
geist, the biblical text has no conception of the human or
divine spirit as disembodied ghosts or immaterial beings. Rather, the
authors of the Hebrew Bible conceive of the Spirit of God as the

-- 91 of 236 --

divine ruach, which is best translated not as spirit but as wind,
breath, or sustaining energy. Ruach is the breath of life that
perpetually animates the whole of the created order (Eccles. 3:21;
11:5; 12:7), the irresistible force of the Creator’s power, which
ushers in both God’s wrath and God’s life-giving presence (Ezek.
13:13; 36:26–27).
According to Jürgen Moltmann, who developed one of the most
influential pneumatologies of the twentieth century,
ruach is at once
“God’s own creative power to give life, and the created ability to live
enjoyed by all the living (Ps. 104:30).”22 For Moltmann, the Spirit’s
creative work is not cut off from our embodied life in the natural
world; rather, God’s
ruach serves as “the divine wellspring of life—
the source of life created, life preserved and life daily renewed, and
finally the source of the eternal life of all created being.”23 From a
biblical perspective, then, there is a necessary blurring of the
boundaries between the activities of God’s Spirit and the human
spirit. God’s
ruach not only brings the first humans to life by
breathing into the dust (Gen. 2:7), it also “returns” to God when the
lives of those creatures come to an end (Eccles. 12:7). According to
the biblical testimony, it isn’t that humans simply live their lives
under their own power until the appointed time at which God
determines they should no longer exist; it is rather that their every
waking moment is animated and upheld by the Spirit of God who is
actively breathing life into the world. In fact, as Psalm 104:29 (and
even Ehud in Job 34:15) makes clear, if the Spirit were not present,
there would be nothing and no one of which we could even speak,
so much so that it would be more accurate to consider humans as
in-spirited bodies.24
Importantly, though, while the biblical authors do indeed use the
word
ruach to talk about both the divine Spirit and the human spirit,
they do not fully equate the human and divine spirit, nor do they
completely collapse the distinction between the two. We too can
picture our own spirits as a wind or a breath, like God’s
ruach, but it
is a breath of a different sort. So, on the one hand, the biblical
witness speaks of
ruach as the Spirit of God in the world, but, on the

-- 92 of 236 --

other hand, in speaking of humans and human creations, it often
employs the image of
hevel. This is the word that the preacher in
Ecclesiastes repeats time and again, and it is often translated as
“meaningless” or “vanity.” But in that book and elsewhere,
hevel is
better translated as vapor, steam, or breath. Consider Psalm 39:
“Surely everyone stands as a mere breath [
hevel]. Surely everyone
goes about like a shadow. Surely for nothing they are in turmoil
[hevel]; they heap up, and do not know who will gather. . . . Surely
everyone is a mere breath [
hevel]” (vv. 5–6, 11 NRSV). In other
words, the human is as fleeting and insubstantial as the
condensation we see when we exhale a warm breath into the cold
night air. Like the clearing of a fog or mist, as soon as it’s here, it’s
gone.25
Of course, as long as there is no movement in the air (e.g., in a
vacuum), a mist or vapor of this sort will remain suspended
indefinitely. It is only under the force of a stronger wind—a stronger
breath—that the mist seemingly disappears. In fact, though, the
condensed water particles hovering together in the air are not
destroyed or annihilated. Rather, they yield themselves; they give
way to another breath. They are at once caught up in and dissipated
by the wind. The vapor is still present, but in its disruption, it is re-
created and reconstituted.26
This image of a fleeting vapor under the influence of the moving
wind is particularly fitting for students of psychology considering
how their research and clinical work might relate to the movement
of God’s Spirit, especially because many of their efforts with clients
will likely never see the light of day and, even if they do, will seem
fleeting at best. They are but a breath. As a consequence, the image
of an ephemeral mist (
hevel) interacting with a gale-force current
(ruach) serves as a helpful metaphor for considering what it looks
like to participate in God’s ongoing project in the world. In doing so,
it offers us a picture of what takes place any time the divine Spirit
meets and merges with the human spirit.

-- 93 of 236 --

The Spirit Animates
In the first place, as the breath of life, the Spirit of God serves as
the animating force behind each and every one of our initiatives,
from the remarkable to the mundane. Theologically speaking, no
human activity takes place outside the Spirit’s purview, and that
includes the work of mental health professionals. Even if we wanted
to section off some domain of life (e.g., clinical psychology) from the
Spirit’s influence, it would not be possible, for the
ruach Elohim is a
pervasive presence that animates the whole of our life in the world.
Just as Psalm 139:7 rightly asks, “Where can I go from your spirit?
Or where can I flee from your presence?” (NRSV). Here the psalmist
is asking a far deeper question than whether an actual location
might exist in which the Spirit is not already present. Rather, as the
all-pervasive, animating force of life, the Spirit is actively present in
our every proceeding as the internal structure that makes any and
every human interaction possible.27
To use a term coined by John V. Taylor, as the animating force of
life, the Spirit is the “go-between God,” the One who creates the
necessary conditions not only for us to be aware of the “other” in
our midst but also for us to recognize the full potential of those
sacred moments in which we encounter another person for who they
truly are.28 From this perspective, to ask how our various human
projects (psychological or otherwise) would unfold in the Spirit’s
absence is as nonsensical as asking what a group of fictional literary
characters might do in the absence of their author. The author
doesn’t merely intervene in the lives of these characters,
occasionally influencing their otherwise self-sustaining activities;
rather, the author constitutes the conditions for their very existence.
Without the author’s ongoing, creative involvement, there simply are
no characters and there is no story. It is in this strong sense that the
Spirit animates our lives and the world we inhabit.

-- 94 of 236 --

The Spirit Disrupts
The idea of a vapor or mist giving way to a stronger wind might
strike some as a fairly innocuous metaphor, but if we think of it in
terms of God’s Spirit engaging with the human spirit, a far more
disruptive and unsettling picture emerges. For instance, it is not
incidental that the most disruptive voices in Israel’s history were the
prophets and judges who, stirred by the Spirit of God, announced
God’s judgment on a hard-hearted and wayward people (Judg. 3:10;
6:34; 11:29; 13:25; Ezek. 11:5; Mic. 3:8; Zech. 7:12). If there is one
thing the Spirit refuses to leave untouched, it’s the status quo. In
fact, disrupting our staid sensibilities is so central to the Spirit’s
ongoing work that, according to Walter Brueggemann, the primary
role of the spirit-filled prophet is to invite disruption into our midst:
The poetic practice of Jeremiah is an invitation to seek for language that
is passionate, dangerous, and imaginative enough to make available the
passion, danger and freedom of God who summons us to God’s own
conflict. It is always a practice of such prophetic poetry to break the
conventions in which we habituate God. The dulled God of the
conventional religious traditions will never yield energy for ministry. But
this poetry gives us hints and permissions about bringing this conflict-
making God to speech. Otherwise, we may miss the conflict which is our
poetic, prophetic vocation.29
If Jeremiah’s prophetic ministry is any indication, to participate in the
Spirit’s work is not to rest comfortably in a stable and predictable
environment. It is rather to open oneself up to a radical form of
disruption, inviting the Spirit to break the conventions in which we
habituate the divine, and, in doing so, to bring this conflict-making
God to speech.
The Spirit Decenters
The Spirit’s disruptive work is particularly unsettling for those who
are located at or near centers of power. A case in point is King
Josiah’s stand against a foreign adversary. One of Judah’s good kings
(2 Chron. 34:2), Josiah is best known for the various reforms he

-- 95 of 236 --

instituted during his reign. Second Chronicles 35:20–27 tells the
story of Josiah’s death, which begins when Neco, the king of Egypt,
attempts to cross through Israel on his way to battle another nation.
Rather than allowing the Egyptian army to pass through peacefully,
Josiah intercepts Neco, which prompts the Egyptian pharaoh to ask,
“What have I to do with you, king of Judah? I am not coming
against you today, but against the house with which I am at war;
and God has commanded me to hurry. Cease opposing God, who is
with me, so that he will not destroy you” (2 Chron. 35:21 NRSV).
According to the text, Josiah refuses to “listen to the words of Neco
from the mouth of God” (2 Chron. 35:22 NRSV) and, as a
consequence, dies from the wounds he incurs in battle, just as Neco
said he would.
Again, this story is nothing if not disturbing, especially for those
who identify as members of the community of faith. But that’s just
as it should be. After all, if anyone has the right to speak for God,
surely it’s the good and faithful king ruling over Yahweh’s covenant
community and not the king of a brutal and marauding nation like
Egypt. Yet, as Josiah’s story suggests, even the chosen people of
God are not always (or perhaps ever?) the center around which the
Spirit’s operations revolve. As it turns out, Josiah’s failure to realize
that the initiatives of the faithful do not stand at the center of God’s
activity in the world was not simply a misstep; it was, in a very real
sense, to actively oppose God (v. 21). In this way, Josiah’s story is
not unique. To borrow again from Taylor, the Spirit repeatedly “goes
to great lengths to teach a particular tribe that it is God’s chosen
people, only to reveal to them that other nations have known the
same salvation-history: ‘Are you Israelites not like Cushites to me?
Says the Lord. Did I not bring Israel up from Egypt, the Philistines
from Caphtor, the Arameans from Kir?’ (Amos 9:7).”30
Biblical stories like these suggest that the Spirit’s decentering work
operates on at least two levels. On the corporate level, the Spirit
upends the unjust power structures of religious communities, nation-
states, and the powerful elite who lead them. But, just as Josiah
discovered, the Spirit also decenters each of us on an individual

-- 96 of 236 --

level, reconfiguring our personal sense of self. Needless to say,
interacting with the Spirit in this way can be painful. In Josiah’s case,
it was fatal, in large part because, just like us, Josiah lived as if his
personal identity (as the king of God’s chosen people) was a
possession as well as a position, something that had to be pried
from his hands. Moving in quite the opposite direction, the Spirit
perpetually calls, invites, and even persuades us to locate the center
of our personal identity not “within” ourselves but “outside”
ourselves—to receive it as a gift from God.
Clinical psychologist Richard Beck refers to this kind of decentered
sense of self as an “eccentric identity,” which he argues was the
defining characteristic of Jesus’s life. Following the work of Arthur
McGill, Beck suggests that Jesus’s identity was the product of his
complete and utter reliance on the decentering Spirit of God.
The center of Jesus’ reality is not within Jesus himself. Everything that
happens to him, everything that is done by him, including his death, is
displaced to another context and is thereby reinterpreted. However, this
portrayal is understood to be a true reflection of Jesus’ own way of
existing. He himself does not live out of himself. He lives, so to speak,
from beyond himself. Jesus does not confront his followers as a center
which reveals himself. He confronts them as always revealing what is
beyond him.31
For Beck, then, the key to Jesus’s identity is that he didn’t actually
possess it; instead, he received it as a gift. Animated at every turn
by the Spirit, Jesus lived a fully decentered life. And we are invited
to do the same. On both the corporate and personal level, we
participate with the Spirit’s decentering work any time we too
embrace an eccentric identity—a deep sense of self that is anchored
not merely outside of ourselves, but ultimately, in God.
The Spirit Disperses
Whether guiding the people of Israel through the wilderness
(Exod. 13:21), leading Jesus into the desert (Matt. 4:1), or
prompting the apostles to bear witness to the gospel in “Jerusalem,
and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the farthest parts of the earth”

-- 97 of 236 --

(Acts 1:8), the Spirit of God not only animates, disrupts, and
decenters, but disperses the human spirit as well. This kind of
scattering is another form of disruption, but its principal orientation
is outward (toward the world) rather than inward (toward the self).
This is to say, as
hevel gives way to
ruach, the Spirit of God moves
us into places and spaces that, if we’re being honest, we would likely
never have chosen ourselves. To be sure, this kind of movement is
almost always uncomfortable, in large part because it is quite
literally an unsettling. But that’s just what it means to be inspired or,
better yet, in-spirited. It is to join in with the movement of the
Divine Breath of Life that cannot be contained or coerced and, in
many cases, is thoroughly unpredictable. As Jesus would remind us,
“The wind blows wherever it will, and you hear the sound it makes,
but do not know where it comes from and where it is going. So it is
with everyone who is born of the Spirit” (John 3:8).
As the risk-averse creatures that we are, we tend to shy away
from such unpredictability in favor of something more certain and
reliable. But this resistance to the unknown merely exposes how
stagnant and settled we’ve become, how prone we are to retreating
into the safety and comfort of the known. Thus, to participate with
the Spirit as Jesus, the apostles, and the people of Israel once did is
not to avoid or run away from being radically unsettled. It is to run
headlong into an unpredictable future filled with equal parts risk and
excitement, knowing full well that the Spirit of God will be present
with us, ushering us into places that we could never have asked for
or imagined (Eph. 3:20) and, in doing so, transforming us.
Cultivating Space Where
Ruach and
Hevel Meet
As theologically imaginative as all this talk of the Spirit as the breath
of life may be, some may be wondering what exactly this has to do
with John, the young man we met earlier who is seeking
professional help for his mental health. From a theological
perspective, what does it mean for a person like John to experience
healing, growth, or transformation if he never comes to a saving
knowledge of Christ? Doesn’t the entire Christian tradition hinge on

-- 98 of 236 --

the confession of the resurrected Christ as humanity’s only true hope
for healing and restoration? If so, can we really speak of John’s life
being renewed, much less him flourishing, if Christ’s redemptive
work is never even considered? As Ezekiel 18:23 points out, it
pleases God even when the wicked turn from their destructive
patterns of death and instead choose life, so surely the same is true
for a person like John. At the very least, God desires for John to
experience a life of wholeness and well-being because John, like
every human, is part of God’s good creation. But is that all we can
say? Could it be that, perhaps, the Spirit of God is not merely
pleased with John’s journey but is in fact actively and passionately
involved in his life as the source of his healing, whether explicitly
acknowledged or not?
Others may have more general concerns, wondering how this
notion of the Spirit ought to inform our understanding of the ways in
which humans are able to collaborate with God’s activity in any
domain (e.g., the therapeutic context) that is not explicitly Christian,
religious, or even theistic. Given that people really do get better in
therapy, how do we make sense of this as Christians, especially
when it involves people who are not Christians and Christ is never
mentioned? In the next chapter, we will examine the relational
dimension of these questions, considering more fully the ways in
which healing happens in and through relationships. But we will also
take up these questions in more depth and detail in part 2 of the
book, where we will explore the various ways in which the Spirit’s
work impacts and, in a very real sense, makes possible the work that
takes place in the context of psychotherapy.
For now, building on the image of a dissipated mist, it will be
enough to say that to participate with the Spirit of God is simply to
have the courage to enter the space where
ruach and
hevel meet,
allowing our human spirit to give way to the Spirit of God. In these
spaces, our task is not to exert control over the chaos of our lives or
the lives of others. Our task is simply to submit to a force at work in
the world that not only energizes and in-spirits us but also disrupts,
scatters, and undoes us. As the biblical testimony makes clear, this

-- 99 of 236 --

process can be as unsettling as it is inspiring, and it almost always
moves us in surprising and unexpected ways.
Yet, beyond a simple willingness to enter a potentially disruptive
space, a robust pneumatology like the one we have outlined
suggests that the primary objective for the student of psychology is
to focus on developing their skills at
creating such spaces—growing
in their capacity to cultivate environments where they and their
clients can together inhale and exhale God’s life-giving breath.32 To
underscore the level of humility required for this endeavor, it is
important to keep in mind that the divine
ruach is always already
blowing in and through our client’s lives. So our role in curating
these spaces has almost nothing to do with leveraging our power or
resources or ingenuity; rather, it’s about joining in the divine
movement that was already in motion long before we joined in and
will continue long after our contributions come to an end.
In this regard, we appreciate Moltmann’s perspective. For
Moltmann,
ruach is not only a personal presence but also the
transcendent space in which we live “in” God’s Spirit. Just as God
provides the psalmist the ability to stand out of harm’s way in “a
wide open place” (Ps. 31:8), we experience the presence of God’s
ruach as the space in which we “live and move and have our being”
(Acts 17:28 NRSV). In this space,
ruach is the most silent and
hidden presence of God’s Spirit, for it is both in us and around us.
Ultimately then, for us to collaborate with God’s
ruach is to cultivate
spaces where we do not simply talk
about the Spirit, but where we
talk
out of the Spirit.33 In other words, it is to create space where
we can come together in unexpected places, forge unexpected
friendships, and simply breathe.
Questions for Reflection and Discussion

-- 100 of 236 --

1. How have pastors, parents, and other Christian leaders in your
life addressed the biblical passages referenced in this chapter (if
at all)? Has our discussion of these passages changed the way
you understand God’s broader work in the world?
2. If the Spirit of God is to humans what an author is to the
fictional characters in a novel, what does this mean for the
various projects we pursue (psychological or otherwise)?
3. How does the image of
ruach and
hevel support or challenge
your understanding of God’s involvement in your life’s work?
4. What would it look like, in concrete terms, for you to participate
in the Spirit’s work of animation, disruption, decentering, and
dispersal?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
Beck, Richard.
The Slavery of Death. Eugene, OR: Cascade Books, 2014.
Johnston, Robert K.
God’s Wider Presence: Reconsidering General
Revelation. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2014.
Pargament, Kenneth I.
Spiritually Integrated Psychotherapy: Understanding
and Addressing the Sacred. New York: Guilford Press, 2007.
1. American Psychological Association, “Ethical Principles of Psychologists
and Code of Conduct,” 2017, https://www.apa.org/ethics/code.
2. Our colleagues at Fuller Seminary, Dr. Siang-Yang Tan, Dr. Brad Strawn,
and Dr. Pamela Ebstyne-King, are notable exceptions to this rule.
3. Kenneth I. Pargament,
Spiritually Integrated Psychotherapy:
Understanding and Addressing the Sacred (New York: Guilford Press, 2007), 8.
4. Pargament cites two key studies suggesting that “only 18% of the
directors [of counseling psychology programs in the United States] indicated
that their graduate programs offered a course that focused on religion or
spirituality (Schulte, Skinner, & Claiborn, 2002). Only 13% of training directors
of clinical psychology programs in the United States and Canada reported that

-- 101 of 236 --

their curriculum included a course on religion and spirituality (Brawer, Handal,
Fabricatore, Roberts, & Wajda-Johnston, 2002).”
Spiritually Integrated
Psychotherapy, 9.
5. An odd sort of disciplinary ambivalence has emerged. As Steven J.
Sandage and Jeannine K. Brown point out, “During the past forty years, the
fields of psychology and psychotherapy have experienced a profound shift on
the topics of ‘religion’ and ‘spirituality,’ even as the formal disciplines of
theology and religious studies remain largely marginalized within psychology.”
Relational Integration, 30.
6. See David A. Steere,
Spiritual Presence in Psychotherapy: A Guide for
Caregivers (New York: Routledge, 2018).
7. We are by no means the first to make this claim about the Spirit’s
presence in the midst of therapy. See, for example, the excellent work of
Siang-Yang Tan in
Counseling and Psychotherapy: A Christian Perspective
(Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2011); and Siang-Yang Tan and Douglas H.
Gregg,
Disciplines of the Holy Spirit: How to Connect to the Spirit’s Power and
Presence (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1997). Our goal here is not to introduce
an entirely novel concept that is without precedent, but rather to develop a
constructive theology of the Spirit that might fill some gaps in the current
literature and offer a more robust series of theological and biblical resources
for psychologists (and psychologists in training) hoping to answer the question
of how their work as clinicians relates to God’s larger project in the world.
8. Even though this book is concerned primarily with developing a more
robust way of doing constructive theology and not so much with “integration”
per se, the question of how the therapist participates with God’s ongoing
mission in the world through the work of clinical psychology reflects the
leading edge of the current integration conversation. See, for example, Megan
Anna Neff and Mark R. McMinn,
Embodying Integration: A Fresh Look at
Christianity in the Therapy Room (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2020).
Indeed, Neff and McMinn conclude their text by raising the same question we
are exploring: What is God up to in the world?
9. Calvin’s work on the topic was expansive and robust. As a consequence,
many of the Reformed theologians writing in the shadow of Calvin have been
in an ongoing argument regarding who is most faithful, not so much to the
biblical text but to Calvin.
10. We owe this turn of phrase to Robert K. Johnston, “The Mystery
Discerning Business,” in
Don’t Stop Believin’: Pop Culture and Religion from
Ben Hur to Zombies, ed. Robert K. Johnston, Craig Detweiler, and Barry Taylor
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press, 2012), 211–12.
11. This captures much of the core argument outlined by G. C. Berkouwer,
General Revelation (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1955); and Bruce A. Demarest,

-- 102 of 236 --

General Revelation: Historical Views and Contemporary Issues (Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 1982).
12. See Emil Brunner and Karl Barth,
Natural Theology: Comprising “Nature
and Grace” (London: Centenary Press, 1946).
13. Even though Barth overstated his case, he was right. The German
church’s acquiescence to Hitler’s rise to power was, in no small part, due to a
natural theology that had no need for God’s active agency in the human
pursuit of knowledge about God. In this respect, Ludwig Feuerbach’s famous
critique in
The Essence of Christianity was shown to be true: “God” is just
“human” shouted loudly.
14. We would like to acknowledge our indebtedness for this phrasing to
Robert K. Johnston,
God’s Wider Presence: Reconsidering General Revelation
(Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2014). Because Johnston’s book interacts
with, draws from, and, indeed, builds on our previous work on this topic, it is
encouraging to see that the theological discourse in which we have played a
small part is now serving as the theological and biblical touchstone for those
exploring the question of how the practice of clinical psychology relates to the
presence and activity of God in the world. A recent example of psychologists
who explicitly cite Johnston’s notion of God’s wider presence as their
theological starting point are Steven J. Sandage and Jeannine K. Brown,
Relational Integration of Psychology and Christian Theology: Theory, Research,
and Practice (New York: Routledge, 2018), 94–95.
15. The bulk of the conversation between Barth and Brunner focuses on the
possibility (or lack thereof) of this “point of contact.” See Barth and Brunner,
Natural Theology.
16. Martin Buber,
I and Thou, trans. Ronald Gregor Smith (Mansfield Centre,
CT: Martino, 2010).
17. In his commentary on Romans, Barth was particularly influenced by
Søren Kierkegaard’s notion of an “infinite qualitative” difference or distinction
between God and humanity. See Søren Kierkegaard,
Training in Christianity
and the Edifying Discourse Which “Accompanied” It, trans. Walter Lowrie
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1941), 139.
18. Johnston,
God’s Wider Presence, 127–28 (emphasis added).
19. Robert Jewett,
Saint Paul at the Movies: The Apostle’s Dialogue with
American Culture (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1993), 65–76.
20. Two recent examples of evolutionary psychologists making claims along
these lines are Michael Tomasello,
Becoming Human: A Theory of Ontogeny
(Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2019); and Robert Boyd,
A Different Kind of
Animal: How Culture Transformed Our Species (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2018).

-- 103 of 236 --

21. Makoto Fujimura,
Culture Care: Reconnecting with Beauty for Our
Common Life (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Books, 2017), 22.
22. Jürgen Moltmann,
The Spirit of Life: A Universal Affirmation, trans.
Margaret Kohl (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1992), 41.
23. Moltmann,
The Spirit of Life, 82.
24. We don’t have the space to unpack this philosophically and theologically
loaded claim. For those who are interested in the implications of such a view,
we point readers to Nancey Murphy’s excellent
Bodies and Souls, or Spirited
Bodies? Current Issues in Theology (Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
Press, 2006).
25. We have covered elsewhere much of what we are outlining here
regarding the Hebrew concepts of
hevel and
ruach. See, e.g., Kutter Callaway,
Scoring Transcendence: Contemporary Film Music as Religious Experience
(Waco: Baylor University Press, 2013), 162–71. That being said, we were
pleasantly surprised to discover that Megan Anna Neff and Mark R. McMinn
also find the image of
hevel helpful for thinking about our contemporary
world. For anyone interested in a more developed account of how the book of
Ecclesiastes can serve as a much-needed conversation partner for those
engaged in clinical psychology, we highly recommend their book,
Embodying
Integration: A Fresh Look at Christianity in the Therapy Room (Downers
Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2020).
26. We owe this particular way of thinking about the interaction between
hevel and
ruach to Jean-Luc Marion,
God without Being, 2nd ed., trans.
Thomas A. Carlson (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012).
27. The theological term most often used to describe this internal structuring
by the Spirit is “immanent transcendence.”
28. John Vernon Taylor,
The Go-Between God: The Holy Spirit and the
Christian Mission (London: SCM, 2004).
29. Walter Breuggemann,
Hopeful Imagination: Prophetic Voices in Exile
(Philadelphia: Fortress, 1986), 15.
30. Taylor,
Go-Between God, 179.
31. Richard Beck,
The Slavery of Death (Eugene, OR: Cascade Books, 2013),
70. Here Beck is quoting from Arthur C. McGill,
Death and Life: An American
Theology (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2003), 49–50.
32. Megan Anna Neff echoes this sentiment when she recounts an
experience she had with one of her clients:
My work with Brooke was humbling and awe provoking in that I quickly
realized I was just one piece of
the work God was already up to in her
life. . . . There is no sophisticated model for integration at play here; what
I needed to do with Brooke
was simply to create a space of acceptance
that allowed for God’s presence while having ears to hear when she talked

-- 104 of 236 --

about her spiritual life. God was with us in the therapy room each week,
and God continued to be with Brooke in the intervening times through her
relationships, in church, in nature, and through prayer. (Neff and McMinn,
Embodying Integration, 180, emphasis added)
33. Moltmann,
Spirit of Life, 57.

-- 105 of 236 --

4
Christology, Incarnation, and
the
	Imago Dei
Key takeaways from this chapter:
The fullest manifestation of God’s incarnational project is the person
and work of Jesus.
Jesus’s incarnation is the means by which God is redeeming all
aspects of human life, including our bodies and emotions.
Christ’s entering into the suffering and pain of others gives us a
glimpse of what an incarnational psychology might look like.
Being human is not a destination but a journey in which we become
more like Christ, the
imago Dei.
I (William) had the good fortune one day to be driving in my car
while Krista Tippett’s wonderful radio program,
On Being, was being
broadcast on NPR. On this day, Krista had just started interviewing
the well-known Quaker author and educator Parker Palmer. Palmer
was describing his experience with depression and how difficult it
was during that time for people to sit and be with him in his
depressive state. Here is his recollection:
These were the people who would say, “Gosh, Parker, why are you sitting
in here being depressed? It’s a beautiful day outside. Go feel the sunshine
and smell the flowers.” And that, of course, leaves a depressed person
even more depressed, because while you know, intellectually, that it’s
sunny out and that the flowers are lovely and fragrant, you can’t really
feel any of that in your body, which is dead in a sensory way. And so

-- 106 of 236 --

you’re left more depressed by this “good advice” to get out and enjoy the
day. And then other people would come and say something along the
lines of “Gosh, Parker, why are you depressed? You’re such a good
person. . . . You’re so successful, and you’ve written so well.” And that
would leave me feeling more depressed because I would feel, “I’ve just
defrauded another person who, if they really knew what a schmuck I was,
would cast me into the darkness where I already am.”1
Those of you who have struggled with depression might know
exactly what Palmer is describing. Having gone through my own
battle with depression in my twenties, I (William) can relate to the
hopelessness and deadness of the feeling Palmer described, and I
can also attest to how frustrating it was being offered quick-fix
solutions from well-intentioned people. Frankly, church leaders can
sometimes lead the pack in advice-giving, providing spiritual
solutions wrapped up in tidy little packages like “pray more” or “cast
your cares upon God.” It’s not that this advice has no kernel of truth
in it, but it’s especially misguided when it is offered from a place
where the person giving the advice is doing so because they are
uncomfortable sitting with the person who is suffering. But even if
depression isn’t something that you’ve experienced firsthand, you
probably can still relate to a time when you’ve been in pain or have
been suffering. Instead of a friend or family member seeking to try
to understand your experience, listen to you, or be present with you,
they tried to “fix” the problem as they understood it, or gave you
advice on what you needed to do. As the program continued, Palmer
went on:
There was this one friend who . . . after asking permission to do so, every
afternoon about 4 o’clock, sat me down in a chair in the living room, took
off my shoes and socks, and massaged my feet. He hardly ever said
anything; he was a Quaker elder. And yet, out of his intuitive sense, from
time to time would say a very brief word like, “I can feel your struggle
today,” or, farther down the road, “I feel that you’re a little stronger at this
moment, and I’m glad for that.” But beyond that, he would hardly say
anything. He would give no advice. He would simply report, from time to
time, what he was intuiting about my condition. Somehow he found the
one place in my body, namely the soles of my feet, where I could

-- 107 of 236 --

experience some sort of connection to another human being. And the act
of massaging just—in a way that I really don’t have words for—kept me
connected with the human race.2
Palmer’s story provides a beautiful picture of what it means to have
someone sit and be present with suffering, staying connected with
another human being. What Palmer did not need were people trying
to offer advice. What was most helpful was having a person making
a connection with him in a very tactile and bodily way. Parker’s friend
offered help and comfort that was “incarnated” in a particular way
through bodily presence and empathy. As Palmer relates, this friend
was also willing to hold the “sacred space of relationship” for him.3
What Palmer describes as a sacred space connects to some of the
main themes that we will discuss in this chapter: incarnation,
embodiment, and restoration. As we look at the ministry and
mystery of the incarnation—that is, God becoming flesh in Jesus
Christ—we find the origin of what it truly means to enter the world
of another.
Christ entered into the suffering of the human world, giving
precedent for what it means to enter into the suffering of others.
Thus, the main purpose of this chapter is to consider what it means
for us to practice psychology in light of the Christian belief that God
has been revealed in Jesus Christ. A closely related concern has to
do with how our psychological research and clinical practice might
be different (and perhaps should be different) given that we believe
that humans are created in the image of the God who took on flesh.
This theological framework paints a picture of what an
“incarnational” psychology might look like. While this topic could be
a book all on its own, for now we want to orient you to a number of
key areas regarding the ongoing work of Christ, expound on what it
means for human beings to be created in the image of God, and
then discuss a few of the ways these theological concepts overlap
with topics in psychology.
In the previous chapter, we talked about how the presence of
God’s Spirit is vital for recognizing and affirming the ways humans
can partner with God’s activity in the broader world, and how this

-- 108 of 236 --

includes realms that are not explicitly Christian, or even theistic.
We’ve also turned to the doctrine of creation as a foundational
theological doctrine for conceptualizing the relationship between
psychology and the Christian faith, providing the “stage” where
God’s action in the world takes place through the Son and Spirit.
Along similar lines, Irenaeus used the metaphor of God’s “two
hands” in the world as the working of the Son and Spirit.4 And it is a
trinitarian framework of precisely this kind that provides a starting
point for how we talk about the significance of the Son’s and the
Spirit’s work in the church and the broader world. To speak of God
as Trinity—God as Father, Son, and Spirit—is to make a statement
about the relational nature of God. Or, said another way, God exists
in relationship and invites the world and the human creature into the
joy and abundance of God’s own life through Jesus Christ.
Ultimately, God’s action of creating, sustaining, redeeming, and
perfecting the world and humanity through the Son and Spirit is the
gospel story, a story of love. As such, it is also the lens through
which we understand the world around us, ourselves, and, as it
relates to our present purposes, even psychology.
God
creates and brings the human creature into existence out of
love. God
sustains the human creature through the Spirit (despite
humanity’s refusal to sometimes participate in the action of God).
God
redeems the human creature through Christ. And God
perfects
the human creature over time by bringing the Creator’s original
intentions to fulfillment through the Spirit of Christ. As we discussed
in chapters 2 and 3, it is possible to understand human involvement
in clinical and research psychology as God’s Spirit actively calling and
enabling human creatures to participate as co-laborers in God’s
creative work to bring about wholeness and healing. In this chapter,
we direct our attention more closely to the ways that God’s
revelation, incarnation, and redemption through Jesus Christ make a
difference for understanding aspects of human flourishing, the
affirmation of our emotional and bodily states, and the possibility of
liberation from oppression.

-- 109 of 236 --

God’s Revelation in Jesus Christ
The bulk of the previous chapter was about how people of Christian
faith would benefit from thinking of general revelation in terms of
God’s wider presence, which includes the work of the Spirit within
creation, conscience, and human culture (and this includes realms of
psychology). Here we will focus more on what theologians have
historically spoken of as special revelation, which is God’s revelation
and salvation through Jesus Christ. In some ways the terms “general
revelation” and “special revelation” are helpful, especially when
delineating the uniqueness of Christ’s life, death, and resurrection.
While general revelation provides glimpses of God’s goodness,
beauty, and truth to the world, it does not detail or give specifics of
salvation through Jesus Christ. However, in other ways the terms
“general” and “special” revelation are unhelpful, especially when we
forget that general and special revelation work together as
complementary modes of God’s loving extension into the world
through the Spirit and Son. God’s revelatory presence sustains and
protects creation, allowing humans to discover truths through the
sciences and psychology that are reliable and trustworthy (general
revelation). At the same time, God’s self-disclosure also restores and
redeems humanity (special revelation). Having described some of
the ways God’s wider presence manifests through general revelation,
here we hope to demonstrate some of the contours of special
revelation that directly affect our work in the psychological sciences.
The central message of the Christian faith is that God reveals
God’s own self through Jesus. This confession is so comprehensive
(even cosmic) in its scope that it impacts every topic we explore and
every discipline in which we participate, including psychology. The
Christian church through the centuries has reflected on this
confession of Christ within the varied contexts and cultures that the
church has found itself. In certain important respects, just as we
indicated in chapter 3, the Christian confession that Christ is Lord
moves us beyond the walls of the church, inviting us to imagine how
Christ’s work makes a difference for the societies, cultures, and
neighborhoods in which we live and work. We also suggested in

-- 110 of 236 --

chapter 1 that psychology is its own culture (albeit a scientific one)
with a set of practices, languages, institutions, and traditions that
constitute it as such. The task then for Christians who work within
psychology is to begin to contextualize how the person and work of
Christ makes a difference for the various fields of psychology they
find themselves in.
When we think about the difference that Christ makes for the field
of psychology, we are engaging in the same task that Christians
have engaged throughout history as they considered how God might
be made “incarnate” within their own contexts and cultures, each of
which was as wide-ranging as it was particular. Moreover, when we
think about Christ becoming flesh in order to redeem and restore,
this has numerous implications for how we understand the
flourishing or thriving of the human creature. Confession of Christ
involves a proper (re)ordering of our lives and actions, and the
centrality of Christ’s life and work impacts the vocation that we have
been called to, no matter what that work looks like or what that
discipline might be. Whether it involves helping to guide and
transform the relationships and behavioral patterns of a child,
adolescent, or family as a psychotherapist, or conducting ethical
psychological research in any subdiscipline as a psychological
scientist, our confession of Christ impacts and shapes our day-to-day
work, our ethical vision, and our sense of vocation as psychological
practitioners.
Incarnation, Abundant Life, and Shalom
Christians who study psychology can understand Christ’s work of
salvation as an affirmation that Christ came to restore and redeem
all aspects of human existence—that is, the bodily, the spiritual, and
the emotional. Jesus experienced the full range of human emotions,
living a life of joyful intimacy and communion with God and others.
This does not mean that Jesus did not suffer, experience sadness, or
have anguish, as he most certainly did (see Matt. 26:38; Luke
22:44). In fact, Jesus encountered moments of profound grief (John
11:35) and even anger (Mark 3:1–6; John 2:15–17). What we learn

-- 111 of 236 --

from Jesus is that to experience life as a human is to be present and
feel and experience the joy and struggles of the world in which we
live. To be human also means that we live in a world where God’s
kingdom has partially come but is not fully actualized. Sadness,
anger, and suffering are realities that we could not completely
eliminate. Like Jesus, Christians still hurt (and unfortunately, hurt
others too). Those who follow Christ still encounter suffering, and
they still have to work through family and relational conflict. As
Parker Palmer states, “To move close to God is to move close to
everything that human beings have ever experienced . . . and that,
of course, includes a lot of suffering, as well as a lot of joy.”5 This
reality alone can ground and center us as we also encounter
suffering or stand alongside those who suffer (2 Cor. 1:4–5; Heb.
2:18).
The message of the gospel is that, in Christ, God’s kingdom has
broken into the world in a new way, but one that still waits eagerly
for complete restoration. God is not a dispassionate observer of our
suffering, though. We can affirm as Christians that we have a God
who suffered in Christ. Furthermore, God does not abandon us in
our suffering. According to the New Testament, rather than offering
a purely “spiritual” solution for the concrete problems that plague
humanity, the abundant life that Christ offers includes bodily
restoration, proclamation of freedom for those imprisoned, recovery
of sight for the blind, and freedom for those who are oppressed
(Luke 4:18). These movements of redemption and healing caused
theologians Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendell and Jürgen Moltmann to
sum them up as the “great love story of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit, a divine love story in which we are all involved together
with heaven and earth.”6 Though sin distorts how humanity relates
to God and hinders human flourishing and disrupts the created
order, it does not corrupt creation entirely or alter God’s commitment
to the human community through the Son and Spirit.7 God’s
covenant love continues to graciously sustain humanity and to

-- 112 of 236 --

“overrule the worst that the human race can do to subvert [God’s]
order.”8
Wholeness, restoration, new life, abundant life, harmony, peace,
shalom: these are all words that attempt to capture elements of the
human flourishing that Christ actualizes through his incarnation, life,
death, and resurrection. The Hebrew word “shalom,” however, offers
a particularly rich and meaningful description of the abundant life
that Jesus brings. It is often translated as “peace,” but a fuller
examination of the word describes more than just an absence of
conflict; it also connotes wholeness and abundance of life. Cornelius
Plantinga describes shalom as the “webbing together of God,
humans, and all creation in justice, fulfillment, and delight.”9 Shalom
is the way God intends things to be, where God’s justice and peace
reign supreme, where relationships are ordered toward love instead
of toward greed, hate, or violence. Shalom is a glimpse of a new
reality where the wolf and the lamb will dwell together and all
creation will not hurt or destroy one another (Isa. 11:6–10). Shalom
gives us a vision of a reality where humans properly understand
their place in the cosmos—not existing to dominate or destroy
creation or others but to tend and care for the things God has placed
under human supervision.
Frankly, who doesn’t want a world where more peace, mercy, and
love reign supreme? Who doesn’t long for the day when justice rolls
down like a river, and righteousness like a mighty stream (Amos
5:24)? The vision of wholeness and flourishing captured by shalom is
one that almost everyone can agree would be good and shares a
longing in their hearts for. As students of psychology, we imagine
there is a longing for something like shalom in your own heart as
you pursue psychological training in order to help others find peace
through mental health. Following this core desire is an important
part of incarnating the love of Christ and working toward shalom in
your own corner of the world, through your work, calling, life, and
vocation.
Jesus brought a foretaste of this shalom to humanity through his
life, death, and resurrection. The prospering and flourishing of

-- 113 of 236 --

human life is what Jesus’s ministry of reconciliation is about, and
longing for God’s kingdom here on earth means becoming Christ
incarnate to those we serve as we cultivate shalom in the arenas
that God has given us. God’s work through the Spirit and Son is the
movement to restore and redeem a creation that has been disrupted
by sin. Shalom is the wholeness that God intended for human and
nonhuman creation. Balanced with an understanding of the doctrine
of creation and pneumatology (explored in chaps. 2 and 3), the
concept of shalom makes clear that students of psychology who are
people of Christian faith have a role in tending, caring for, and being
good stewards of the small part of the created realm they inhabit.10
Incarnation and Embodiment as an Affirmation of
Bodily Existence
All Christian theology hinges on the fact that God became flesh in
Jesus Christ to bring restoration to the world. Because God’s project
in the world is incarnational (i.e., enfleshed), it brings about a
holistic form of restoration that includes all aspects of human
existence (the bodily, mental, and emotional realms of human
personhood). Although not every dimension of human existence will
be restored in the present life, it can begin in the here and now and
will be brought to completion in the age to come (the eschaton). For
example, the cognitive and emotional development of human
persons and their learned patterns of behavior, which are distinctly
psychological phenomena, are the very realms that are impacted by
the abundant life that Jesus describes in John 10:10. These
psychological processes may not be fully restored in the present age,
but they can be integrated into our lives in ways that promote rather
than preclude the cultivation of shalom, or wholeness.
To move in the direction of this kind of wholeness, however, we
must first and foremost acknowledge that human life is both physical
and embodied. Warren Brown and Brad Strawn helpfully remind us
that, as humans, we do not merely
have bodies but we
are
embodied creatures, and there is no reality that we encounter that

-- 114 of 236 --

can be perceived apart from our own physicality.11 Because God has
created a world where human life is both physical and embodied,
God’s redemptive work in the world also involves God becoming
incarnated in bodily form in Jesus Christ.12 God’s saving, restoration,
and healing are embodied in Jesus Christ. This fact alone highlights
the value of us being created as material and bodily beings. Jesus’s
incarnation offers an important affirmation of both human and
nonhuman creation. Indeed, according to Irenaeus, the incarnation
alone is the basis for God’s affirmation of the goodness of the
material world and bodily existence. Irenaeus reasoned that if God
the Son takes the form of human flesh, then nothing that is created
can be downgraded as unimportant or be treated as fundamentally
evil.13
Jesus’s human bodily existence, his experience of the full range of
emotional states, and his encounters with suffering demonstrate the
value of the human experience, which includes both our bodily
existence and our various emotional and psychological states. Thus,
the doctrine of the incarnation provides the theological basis for
much of the work that we do in the field of psychology, especially as
it relates to the affirmation of human life, emotions, and
relationships, but also as it concerns the validation of the suffering
and pain that we as humans encounter. Of course, as we discussed
before, certain aspects of our bodily existence and our psychosocial
life are also affirmed through the doctrine of creation. In addition to
God’s incarnation in Jesus, the very fact that God freely created the
world out of love is itself the ultimate affirmation of creation’s
goodness. God is the one who loves in freedom, freely creates the
world out of love, and freely creates because love seeks to share its
goodness.14
As a consequence, God’s disclosure of God’s own self through the
Son and Spirit serves as the larger theological framework not only
for understanding our own embodied lives but also for how our lives
are transformed through the person and work of Christ. God’s
creative project in the world has an ultimate end or aim (telos),

-- 115 of 236 --

which is to sustain, redeem, and bring wholeness to humanity (and
the entire creation). Jesus comes to restore human life and
existence, and he provides the perfect example of how a human
creature’s relationships, emotions, and mind have the potential for
being shaped toward the telos that God has intended. And one
particular way in which Christ reshapes the telos of human existence
is by demonstrating what it looks like to live under the guidance and
direction of the Spirit on a moment-by-moment basis (Gal. 5:25).
God’s incarnation in Jesus Christ is therefore a testament both to
God’s compassionate love for a world that is “very good” (Gen. 1:31)
and to God’s desire for the human creature to be directed toward
ends that are equally good. That being said, to affirm that the
nonhuman world (animals, plants, soil, oceans) and the human
creature are good is not to deny the reality of evil. We must always
acknowledge that the reality of evil remains a threat that impinges
on God’s good creation, but we can affirm that God calls creation
good in the beginning and that Jesus becoming flesh through the
incarnation further affirms that humans, in their emotions,
physicality, and biology, are not inherently bad or evil. This is good
news for us who study psychology, since so much psychological
research is concerned with the very basic emotional, bodily, and
behavioral aspects of human existence.
Motivated by this theological vision, it follows that at least some
aspects of human healing and wholeness can be aided and guided
by the discipline of psychology. This does not mean that psychology,
the sciences writ large, or some theory of psychotherapy could ever
replace the salvation and restoration offered in Christ. However, the
argument we want to put forward is that affirming the centrality of
our emotional and bodily life is more critical than ever given the
Christian tradition’s historical tendency to elevate the spiritual realm
while simultaneously devaluing the body and emotions. Within
evangelical and fundamentalist streams of Christianity in particular,
the decoupling of the human creature from the human body has led
to forms of mission that stress the salvation of one’s soul to the
neglect of the bodily needs of human existence (e.g., disregarding
necessities such as food, shelter, clothing). Here, Protestants can

-- 116 of 236 --

learn much from their Catholic sisters and brothers, whose lived
theology has often held the church’s mission of salvation, human
dignity, and social justice together in a much tighter way than some
streams of White Protestant Christianity in the twentieth century.15
To say that aspects of wholeness and healing can be aided by
psychology is to recognize that restoration is often transmitted or
mediated in a relational and bodily form, and that psychotherapists
often act as an embodied (and incarnated) form of love for their
clients or patients. It is also to recognize that, through the creation
of these hospitable spaces, healing can and does occur. Our ability to
shape, tend, and nurture the created realm is directly related to the
ways in which we cultivate our human relations as well.
Relationships that are tended and nurtured through love over time
have the potential to thrive, and those relationships that have been
neglected and shaped by hatred, violence, or greed lead to a
diminishment rather than an enhancement of human personhood.
Our actions and speech have creative capacities, and while we are
finite creatures who do not create life out of nothing (
ex nihilo), we
do shape relational realms through our actions and speech, each of
which has the potential for producing either the restoration or
diminishment of life.
Christ in Varied Contexts: Liberation from
Stigmatization and Discrimination
In the first chapter we talked about how both psychology and
theology represent different traditions of inquiry. We also discussed
the various lenses that theologians have commonly looked through
in order to gain clarity on their lives and the world. Just as we noted
that there are different lenses that theologians use, we also noted
that, within the Protestant Christian tradition, there are also varied
denominational and cultural lenses that give us a rich diversity of
views and interpretations of Scripture. We all read Scripture from a
situated standpoint—a sociocultural context in which we are
embedded. As a result, we interpret the person and work of Christ

-- 117 of 236 --

through the lenses provided to us by our family, background,
culture, and community of faith. As theologian Daniel Migliore notes,
traditional Western (and predominantly White) interpretations of the
person and work of Christ are no less contextual than those done by
Black theologians or those of women.16 In short, cultural history,
tradition, and context also influence the various ways that we
understand Christ’s work of salvation and restoration. Examining
how Christ has been understood in varied cultural contexts provides
essential elements for understanding the person and work of Christ,
especially in relation to Christ’s ministry of restoration and
reconciliation. This is an important point to highlight because White,
Western, Protestant, evangelical conceptions of Christ have often
conceptualized salvation as an entirely “otherworldly” process. In
doing so, they overlook the significance of emotional and
psychological states, failing to recognize that salvation cannot be
separated from the concrete realities that constitute human life in
the created order.
Responding in part to these historic oversights, David Kelsey’s
Eccentric Existence argues that we should understand theological
anthropology in both proximate and ultimate arenas. “Proximate”
arenas of existence and restoration are those that relate to the
immediate physical, social, and cultural lives of humans. “Ultimate”
arenas of existence and restoration are those that are primarily in
relation to God, salvation, and the cosmos.17 According to Kelsey,
Christologies developed by African Americans, Latinx, female, and
Asian American theologians, as well as theologies constructed by
persons of color, tend to emphasize these proximate arenas of
human existence in ways that are applied and oriented toward
justice. To focus on these proximate realms is to consider how
various forms of oppression, systemic injustices, and the
diminishment of human existence are brought about by racism,
poverty, and sexism. Each of these serves as a key element for any
contemporary theological reflection, but they become even more
pertinent as we consider the relations between psychology and
Christianity. Let us consider a few of the ways in which constructive

-- 118 of 236 --

theologies that emphasize these proximate arenas might help us
understand more fully how we can engage in theologically informed
psychology.
Liberation Theologies
A deep and abiding concern for social justice often serves as one
of the primary motivations for much of the work that we do in
psychology. As both of us (William and Kutter) think back to the time
we studied at the Fuller Graduate School of Psychology, we
remember many classmates who wanted to become psychologists
almost entirely because of their desire to help underserved
populations, to seek justice in systems that are oppressive, or to
provide mental health services for communities where there are
pronounced disparities in the health-care system. The emphasis that
Christianity places on the dignity of every human life as a beloved
child of God, whether poor or rich, whether Black, Brown, or White,
is a vital feature of the gospel. Liberation theology in particular has
drawn attention to the important fact that Christians should be very
concerned with the plight of the poor. Given that the poor,
underprivileged, and marginalized in contemporary societies not only
have access to fewer resources but are also oppressed by systems
and structures that often favor the rich and those with privilege and
power, liberation theology reminds us that, as Christians, we have an
obligation to pursue justice for “the least of these” (Matt. 25:40).
Liberation theology’s notion that the church should have a
preferential option for the poor is informed by readings of the gospel
that understand Jesus as being part of a marginalized group living
primarily among the poor.18 For Latin American theologians, Jesus
not only identified with those who were on the margins of society
but also confronted sinful systems of oppression that kept people in
bondage. Our understanding of a theologically engaged psychology
is informed by the basic principles espoused by liberation
theologians that move us to understand Christ’s work as being
involved in these proximate areas of societal injustices in relation to
the poor.

-- 119 of 236 --

Black Theology, Feminist Theology
While liberation theologies and Latin American theologians draw
attention to the plight of the poor and systems of oppression, Black
theologians rightly draw attention to the complexities and systemic
injustices perpetrated by the racist structures of contemporary
society. Feminist and womanist theologians draw our attention to
sexist structures of society that overlook women, and especially
women of color.
One of the chief architects of contemporary Black theology, James
Cone, puts it like this: “The gospel of Jesus is not a rational concept
to be explained in a theory of salvation, but a story about God’s
presence in Jesus’ solidarity with the oppressed, which led to his
death on the cross. What is redemptive is the fact that God snatches
victory out of defeat, life out of death, and hope out of despair. . . . I
begin and end my theological reflections in the social context of
Black people’s struggle for justice.”19
Black theology was born out of the experiences of those within
North America who have struggled against the oppression of racism
and the brutal legacy of slavery. Cone reminds us that God’s
salvation is a liberating event in the lives of all who are struggling for
survival and dignity in a world bent on denying their humanity.20
Moreover, Black theologians remind us that the cross has a unique
meaning for those who are currently experiencing oppression and
suffering. As Howard Thurman explains, “It cannot be denied that
too often the weight of the Christian movement has been on the
side of the strong and the powerful and against the weak and
oppressed—this, despite the gospel.”21 Thus, the basic message that
Jesus stands in solidarity with the poor, with those who experience
racism, and with those who experience exploitation by an oppressive
system is often missed by those in positions of privilege who have
not experienced racism, slavery, or living under an oppressive
system. Black theologians remind us that context and race matter
for how we read and interpret Scripture. For instance, a middle-class
White male who reads Luke 4 about Jesus bringing freedom for

-- 120 of 236 --

captives and those who are oppressed might envision those who are
physically in the prison system, and he might even have some
thoughts of what it would mean to serve those who are
incarcerated. However, Black theologians remind us that when a
Black woman or man reads about freedom for the oppressed and
the captive in a passage like Luke 4, they might remember the
historic system of chattel slavery that imprisoned and oppressed
grandparents or great-grandparents, or recall the ongoing inequity in
our prison system where persons of color regularly receive longer
and more severe sentences for the same crimes compared to their
White counterparts.22 As Danté Stewart notes, “To be black and to
be Christian is to remember the brutality of our experience and the
brilliance of our resistance.”23
Along with the ideas found in liberation and Black theologies
concerning Jesus’s solidarity with the oppressed, feminist
theologians similarly note that their theology of the cross is informed
by their experience of being excluded or oppressed because of their
gender. To be a feminist, according to theologian Anne Carr, is to be
“someone (male or female) who recognizes that women are fully
human, acknowledges the imbalance and injustice that for centuries
has, in church and society, characterized the situation of women,
and is committed to righting that wrong.”24 Feminist theologies
(typically those done by White women), womanist theologies
(feminist theological perspectives by Black women), and
mujerista
theologies (feminist theological perspectives from Hispanic and
Latinx women) all alert us to how oppressive systems of patriarchy
and toxic masculinity (and, yes, these are particularly found within
the church) can lead to a devaluing and subjugation of women. As
feminist theologians correctly point out, Jesus’s identification with
those on the margins provides the basis for paying particular
attention to the plight of women, since women have for centuries
found themselves on the margins of society and the church. New
Testament feminist scholars emphasize that the movement Jesus
initiated was fundamentally egalitarian, or “at least was a

-- 121 of 236 --

countercultural movement that leveled class, ethnic and gender
differences, and one that heralded ‘a new redemptive humanity.’”25
As Christians, when we consider what it means to stand in
solidarity with the poor, the oppressed, the marginalized, and those
who have felt the ostracizing effects of racism or sexism, we
understand that our work in psychology must bend toward social
justice as well. When we take seriously the fact that Jesus was poor,
lived under an oppressive Roman regime, and preached to and
healed those who were on the margins, we have no other choice but
to examine our own privileges and to work to increase the welfare
and flourishing of others. If Jesus Christ is only thought of as a
spiritual being, detached from his incarnate, cultural, and embodied
humanity, we risk not only overlooking God’s preferential option for
the marginalized and the poor, but also projecting our own cultural
values onto Jesus.26
Consequently, when we speak of the “reality of the gospel,” we
specifically mean a robust vision of humanity and salvation that
properly incorporates movement toward others. Theologian Colin
Gunton puts it this way: “If Jesus is the one true image of God, and
is the one in whom the right dominion of the creation is re-
established as he speaks of truth, heals the sick and lifts up the
oppressed,” then it follows that those who desire to make Christ
“incarnate” for the world will find themselves doing many of the
same things.27 This movement is grounded in our vocation within
psychology and includes actively
shaping social realities for the
kingdom. It is true that redemption is about restoration from
individual sin, but this also means that we work for redemption on a
societal and communal level—working to redeem culturally and
socially ingrained imaginations and values. Christ’s incarnation
inaugurated a new kingdom and established him as the model for
how to treat people with dignity and live in harmony.
On a systemic level, liberation, Black, and feminist theologies
remind us of the disheartening and unsettling fact that the church
can house prejudices and engage in oppressive behavior toward
those with different ethnic heritages and social statuses, just like our

-- 122 of 236 --

wider culture can. For instance, we recall the disturbing reality that
many White slaveholders during the 1800s also professed to be
Christians. Moreover, when we zoom in on the individual level,
disciplines like neuropsychology and cognitive psychology reveal how
malleable and plastic our decision-making is—even for Christians.
This research suggests that when one is in extremely stressful
situations, executive functions are diminished, decision-making is
altered, and underlying habitual responses take over.28 It is a
humbling reminder that Christians
are influenced by power
structures and society’s dominant worldview. As a consequence, we
have the potential to act in accordance with learned stereotypes that
can oppress others, unless these are actively considered, countered,
and changed. To be more specific, events that have shaped our
conscience—like officer-involved killings of unarmed Black men and
women—are not isolated events, and they remind us of the history
of systemic oppression, injustice, and racism that have had, and
continue to have, devastating effects on the children of God. Many
racist events have been dismissed by White Christians, instead of
calling out evil for what it is. One is reminded of Martin Luther King
Jr.’s incisive observation: “We will have to repent in this generation
not merely for the hateful words and actions of the bad people but
for the appalling silence of the good people.”29
Yet, we do not have to settle for this kind of silence. Christ’s
example of standing in solidarity with the oppressed provides us with
a vision to follow in working to dismantle our own racist and
oppressive thoughts and behaviors. As authors, we believe this
cannot be done unless we practice an incarnational psychology and
enter into the reality of another—not through seeking to give advice
or trying to fix things but by being humble and learning to listen and
feel and allowing ourselves to be led by God’s Spirit.
Fortunately, we do not have to look very far to discover the extent
to which social realities will be shaped in God’s new world. Besides
the Scriptures already referenced, the book of Revelation gives us
another vision for what this future reality might look like. Revelation
7 depicts a great multitude from every tribe, nation, and tongue

-- 123 of 236 --

worshiping the Lamb. The picture is a vivid one, with humanity
(despite ethnic differences and language) uniting as one in worship
of the Creator. While this vision does not align with what we see in
the wider society, or in many communities of faith, it nevertheless
becomes the end to which we are all oriented. God has set the
created order on a certain trajectory to be transformed by the Son
and Spirit, and Christians and communities of faith have the
responsibility to work toward the renewal of the present world to
reflect this coming kingdom. We believe that work in psychology can
be an extension of the work of the church in cultivating restorative
spaces for those who have been stigmatized, marginalized, or
oppressed.
The Incarnation of Christ as the Model for What It
Means to Be Human
We’ve already noted how psychology alone cannot provide a
comprehensive ontology that tells us everything about human
nature. Yet psychology’s methodological naturalism does not mean
that Christians who practice psychology must also subscribe to a
purely naturalistic portrait of human nature.30 Psychology offers
important insights into human personhood, but comprehensive
statements regarding ontology (i.e., what it means to be human) are
deepened and broadened when we consider the theological reality
that God became human in Christ. This kind of theological
broadening was evidenced by what we noted above regarding the
proximate arenas of human existence that certain Christologies
highlight, namely, that Christ’s life and death move us to consider
how we live and act toward others and how we work for justice and
healing in the world around us—especially in our work within the
discipline of psychology.
The reality of Christ taking on flesh is a core aspect of Christian
theological anthropology and a Christian ontology of being. Although
psychology speaks of the relational and social components of human
personhood, the Christian theological tradition would suggest that

-- 124 of 236 --

psychology can speak of these realities and study these realities only
because God has created humans as relational and social creatures.
Furthermore, although psychology provides a helpful means for
understanding the various relational and social aspects of humanity,
psychological explorations are not always informed by Christian or
theological conceptions of personhood. Christians who study
psychology can use and greatly benefit from psychology’s insights,
and there are considerable areas of overlap, but our view of
humanity is not informed only by psychology. For instance, God’s
affirmation of humanity in Christ and God’s revelation of God’s own
self through Christ both expands on and reorients the insights into
humanity that are gleaned in and through psychology. Christ as the
One who lived an abundant and flourishing life becomes the model—
the exemplar—of a life lived fully and abundantly. It is Christ who is
the epitome of what it truly means to be human, and it is Christ, as
the paradigm of God’s determination of the creature, who “actualizes
human personhood rather than stunts the creature’s freedom.”31
We are discussing Christology and theological anthropology (i.e.,
what it means for humans to be created in the image of God) in the
same chapter because we understand Christ to be the perfect
embodiment of humanity. Much of the discussion about humanity in
the integration literature has tended to focus on the
imago Dei apart
from a consideration of what it means for humanity to be re-created,
renewed, and restored by Christ. In addition, as Dallas Willard has
noted, popular church culture’s message about morality and the
sinful tendencies of human nature has resulted too often in a
“gospel of sin management” rather than an emphasis on the
freedom, wholeness, transformation, and restoration that new life in
Christ brings.32 Even within the psychology and theology literature,
there is the tendency to focus almost exclusively on the depraved
state of humanity.33 As a result, those studying and teaching
psychology are in need of a more holistic view that highlights
humanity’s wholeness and restoration—one that conceives of
humanity as moving toward a particular telos. Rather than a static
notion of humanity, a view of this kind emphasizes the dynamic,

-- 125 of 236 --

developmental processes by which humans are conformed into the
image of Christ.34
In light of the New Testament’s witness of Christ being the image
of God (2 Cor. 4:4; Col. 1:15), Christ plays a central role in our
understanding of what it means to be human creatures likewise
made in the
imago Dei (Rom. 8:29; 1 Cor. 15:49). Even though the
term itself comes from the passage in Genesis 1:26–27 where the
creation story speaks of God creating humanity in God’s image, the
imago Dei takes on new meaning as the New Testament authors
deploy it in order to understand the theological significance of the
person and work of Christ. For example, the apostle Paul suggests in
Colossians 1:15–23 that Christ illuminates true human personhood
and transformation. According to Paul, Christ remains the perfect
example of the embodied Word, both creature and Creator, who is
both fully human and fully divine.35 Oliver Crisp notes that “human
beings are made in the image of God by being made in the image of
Christ.”36 Similarly, Karl Barth famously argued that the “ontological
determination of humanity is grounded in the fact that one man
among all others is the man Jesus.”37 In other words, Christ as the
true image of God is the example for humanity because Christ
reverses the pattern of fallen humanity, thus bringing about
restoration and healing. This reversal of the human story by Christ,
through the power of the Spirit, is a description of the re-creating
and redirecting of true human destiny through Christ’s life, death,
and resurrection.38 Humanity is created with the capacity to image
God through Christ, both individually and collectively. In love, God
allows those who might not acknowledge Christ or God to still
experience aspects of thriving through God’s common grace.
Christians thrive through their participation in the life of the triune
God and as they become more like Christ—and non-Christians also
have the capacity for relationship with God, though they may not
exercise this capacity in the same way.39

-- 126 of 236 --

Christian Anthropology in Dialogue with the
Psychological Sciences
Both psychology and Christian anthropology are interested in the
proximate features of human existence. Although ultimate realms of
existence (i.e., eschatological hope and resurrected bodies—yes,
bodies!) are essential features of Christian anthropology, the
proximate realms of human existence are the key points of overlap
between psychology and theology. For instance, from a Christian
anthropological standpoint, it is the work of both the Son and Spirit
within the material and embodied existence of human lives that
brings persistent and consistent healing, whether social, emotional,
mental, or behavioral. By focusing on these more proximate
concerns, we are able to move from abstract theological reflections
toward a consideration of more concrete matters such as the
relational and social capacities of humanity, the embodied nature of
the human creature, and the malleability and dynamism that occur
in human development. While we are intentionally not including a
lengthy survey of the various viewpoints of the image of God
(because these can be found easily elsewhere), these three
components of Christian anthropology are especially important for
engaging in theologically informed psychology.
Relational and Social Capacities of Humanity
One of the chief points of connection between Christian
conceptions of human personhood and psychology’s understanding
of humanity is how both disciplines describe the relational and social
dimensions of human nature. In terms of Christian anthropology, the
relational dimensions of how God created humanity are quite clear.
Starting with the creation story in Genesis, God creates humanity
within a network of relationships, and these relationships include
God, other humans, nonhuman animals, the earth, and our own
selves. Knowing that God’s Spirit moves and works in all aspects of
this relational matrix, we also understand that when any of these
relationships is broken, misguided, or disjointed, we are not living
the fullest life that we can live.

-- 127 of 236 --

Echoing Scripture, psychology also operates with a fundamentally
social and relational portrait of human nature—as well as recognition
that relationships can make or break us. Children exposed to
consistent abuse and trauma learn to be fearful about relationships
and the world around them, whereas children who are lovingly
nurtured develop a sense of confidence about themselves and can
learn to explore the world from the secure base of their caregiver.
Here we find evidence that Scripture’s command to love God and
love neighbors is not only instructive about how we should treat one
another but also has the effect of strengthening relationships and
social bonds over time. Christ came to bring a new order to our
relational world, a relational reordering of priorities that properly
situates us within the created realm and, in turn, enhances our
capacity to flourish as the relational creatures we are.
Embodied Nature of the Human Creature
As theologians have attempted to discern from Scripture what
makes human nature unique, a common critique is that their
descriptions of the
imago Dei often drift into abstractions that easily
overlook or simply dismiss the significance of human embodiment.
To avoid this common error, we must foreground and not forget the
“earthy, embodied dimensions of humanness.”40 Theological
explorations of human nature that focus only on intelligence or
language to describe humanity are far too narrow and dismiss the
vast complexities of how body, brain, mind, and spirit are intricately
intertwined. The term “embodiment” is the word we use to speak of
the whole-person view of humanity that comprises body, brain,
mind, and spirit in a psychosomatic unity. We’ve already noted that
being created in the image of God means that we are re-created in
Christ’s image and we possess the capacity to relate to God and
others, but the emphasis on embodiment here sums up the
important fact that Christ had a body and that to be human is to
exist in a certain embodied form that shapes our very nature.
Moreover, as humans we cannot relate in any other way with God,

-- 128 of 236 --

others, and the world around us except through our own embodied
selves.
On Being and Becoming Human
“Becoming” is simply the term we are using to describe the
dynamic state of change that occurs in the physical, biological, and
spiritual realms of human growth and development over time—from
conception, infancy, and childhood on up to adulthood. From a
theological perspective, authentic human identity is never something
that is fully achieved or possessed by the human creature but is
something that we more closely approximate as we grow and
change over time. Becoming human is therefore a “perpetual
movement of receiving and responding” to the gifts and the absolute
generosity of the triune God.41 Susan Ross similarly observes that
being created in God’s image is “not a static reality found in one
discrete and identifiable part of ourselves” but is rather a “dynamic
process of opening ourselves to the world, caring for it as best we
can with all of our abilities, and reflecting on our place in the world
with both awe and lament.”42 In other words, to conceive of
humanity in terms of the
imago Dei is to understand the human
person as a fundamentally dynamic creature—with change and
growth happening over time as humans live in reciprocal
relationships with God, others, and the created realm.43
Every human person enjoys gifts from God and can flourish when
they move toward relating to themselves and with others in ways
that reflect the compassionate and self-giving love of Christ. This
element of flourishing is what we might consider the common telos
of human being and becoming, and it is made possible by the wider
work of the Spirit of God in the world; however, flourishing or
abundant life for the Christian also has a particularized telos
. This
distinctly Christian, developmental vision of thriving freely
acknowledges that, through the Spirit, Christ is at work in our lives,
which moves us to consider both proximate and ultimate arenas of
human existence. Although the image of God in humanity is given

-- 129 of 236 --

structure through Christ, the “Spirit . . . realizes a particular pattern
of life on earth.”44 Thus, the relation between Christ and the Spirit in
regard to anthropology looks like this: Christ
redeems and
organizes
a pattern for human existence in the world, while the Spirit
particularizes and
brings freedom within the structures of the
world.45
A Journey rather than a Destination
If the human sciences have taught us anything in the past thirty
years, especially through discoveries in neuroscience and
neuropsychology, it is how malleable human development is. While
genetic makeup does dictate functional structures of one’s
personhood, it provides only a rough sketch, and the rest is formed
through complex environmental interactions as humans relate with
the world around them.46 Humans are shaped and formed as they
interact and make meaning of the world, and this includes both
physical and spiritual realities. Although developmental psychology
speaks to how our cognitive structures and physical abilities are
shaped along with the physical world around us—especially as
infants—we also note that we are shaped by ongoing human
engagement with the being and activity of God. Such a
conceptualization affirms the significance of the human person’s
relational capacities and embodied nature, but it also recognizes that
these physical, embodied capacities do not stand outside the
purview of the ongoing activity of Christ’s Spirit.
Given that the Spirit creates new energies as the sustainer and
perfecter of life, we should not be surprised that there could be
dynamism and change over time when conceptualizing human
nature from a Christian theological anthropological perspective. Put
differently, the process of being conformed to the image of the
incarnate Christ who is the
imago Dei reflects an end or telos to
which we will never fully arrive in the present age. Additionally,
human nature itself is fundamentally dynamic, developmental, and in
process. Consequently, we can say with some confidence that to be

-- 130 of 236 --

human as Christ is human is not about arriving at some destination
or disembodied state of being, but about embarking on a fully
embodied journey toward the kind of abundant life that was made
possible through the incarnation.
Questions for Reflection and Discussion
1. As a human, what does it mean to be a body rather than to have
a body?
2. What messages about the body and emotions (implicit or
explicit) did you receive from your religious tradition?
3. What might it look like to be Christ incarnate to those we serve
through clinical and research psychology?
4. In light of the contributions of Black, feminist, and liberation
theologies, what does a preferential option for the poor,
oppressed, and marginalized mean for your studies and future
work as a psychological practitioner?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
Balswick, Jack O., Pamela Ebstyne King, and Kevin S. Reimer.
The
Reciprocating Self: Human Development in Theological Perspective. 2nd
ed. Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2016.
Brown, Warren S., and Brad D. Strawn.
The Physical Nature of Christian Life:
Neuroscience, Psychology, and the Church. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2012.
Gutiérrez, Gustavo.
A Theology of Liberation: History, Politics, and Salvation.
Translated by Caridad Inda and John Eagleson. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis
Books, 1988.
Thurman, Howard.
Jesus and the Disinherited. Boston: Beacon, 1996.

-- 131 of 236 --

1.
On Being with Krista Tippett, “The Soul in Depression,” interview with
Parker Palmer, original air date January 17, 2003, available at
https://onbeing.org/programs/the-soul-in-depression/.
2.
On Being with Krista Tippett, “The Soul in Depression.”
3.
On Being with Krista Tippett, “The Soul in Depression.”
4. Marianne Meye Thompson observes that one of the best explanations of
the “unity of Father, Son and Spirit is Irenaeus’s characterization of the Son
and Spirit, Word and Wisdom, as the ‘two hands of God’ which highlights that
the actual agency in the whole of salvation history, both creation and
redemption and all that lies between, really is rooted in the Father.” “The
Raising of Lazarus in John 11,” in
The Gospel of John in Christian Theology,
ed. Richard Bauckham and Carl Mosser (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2008), 26.
5.
On Being with Krista Tippett, “The Soul in Depression.”
6. Elisabeth Moltmann-Wendell and Jürgen Moltmann,
Humanity in God
(New York: Pilgrim Press, 1983), 88.
7. Jürgen Moltmann,
God in Creation: A New Theology of Creation and the
Spirit of God, trans. Margeret Kohl (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1985).
8. Colin E. Gunton,
The Triune Creator: A Historical and Systematic Study
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1988), 192.
9. Cornelius Plantinga,
Not the Way It’s Supposed to Be: A Breviary on Sin
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995), 10.
10. William Whitney, “Beginnings: Why the Doctrine of Creation Matters for
the Integration of Psychology and Christianity,”
Journal of Psychology and
Theology 48, no. 1 (2020): 61.
11. Warren S. Brown and Brad D. Strawn,
The Physical Nature of Christian
Life: Neuroscience, Psychology, and the Church (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2012), 16.
12. William A. Dyrness,
The Earth Is God’s: A Theology of American Culture
(Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1997), 20.
13. These insights from Irenaeus are mentioned in Gunton,
Triune Creator,
52.
14. Karl Barth,
Church Dogmatics II/1, trans. G. W. Bromiley (Edinburgh,
Scotland: T&T Clark, 1961), 257.
15. George Marsden,
Fundamentalism and American Culture, 2nd ed. (New
York: Oxford University Press, 2006), 229–58.
16. Daniel L. Migliore,
Faith Seeking Understanding: An Introduction to
Christian Theology (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 2004), 187.
17. David H. Kelsey,
Eccentric Existence: A Theological Anthropology, 2 vols.
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2009), 1:4–5.
18. Liberation theology was popularized by Gustavo Gutiérrez,
A Theology of
Liberation (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1973). Liberation theology’s followers

-- 132 of 236 --

and ideologies have had a rocky relationship with the official Catholic Church
until more recently, when Pope Francis, the first Latin American pope,
indicated that the church should have preference for the poor, going so far as
to call for a “poor church for the poor.” See “Pope Francis Wants ‘Poor Church
for the Poor,’” BBC News, March 16, 2013, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-
europe-21812545.
19. James H. Cone,
The Cross and the Lynching Tree (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis
Books, 2011), 150–51.
20. Cone,
The Cross and the Lynching Tree, 151.
21. Howard Thurman,
Jesus and the Disinherited (Boston: Beacon, 1996),
31.
22. Christopher Ingraham, “Black Men Sentenced to More Time for
Committing the Exact Same Crime as a White Person, Study Finds,”
Washington Post, Nov. 16, 2017,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/11/16/black-men-
sentenced-to-more-time-for-committing-the-exact-same-crime-as-a-white-
person-study-finds.
23. Danté Stewart, “Black Theology Sings of Freedom,”
Christianity Today,
Feb. 25, 2020, https://www.christianitytoday.com/ct/2020/february-web-
only/black-theology-sings-freedom-dante-stewart.html.
24. Anne Carr, “Feminist Views of Christology,”
Chicago Studies 35 (August
1996): 128.
25. Lisa Isherwood and Dorothea McEwan, eds.,
An A to Z of Feminist
Theology (Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1996), 26.
26. J. Kameron Carter,
Race: A Theological Account (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2008).
27. Gunton,
Triune Creator, 210.
28. See Amy F. T. Arnsten, “Stress Signaling Pathways That Impair Prefrontal
Cortex Structure and Function,”
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10, no. 6
(2009): 410–22; and L. Schwabe and O. T. Wolf, “Stress and Multiple Memory
Systems: From ‘Thinking’ to ‘Doing,’”
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17, no. 2
(2013): 60–68.
29. Martin Luther King Jr., “Letter from Birmingham City Jail (1963),” in
Testament of Hope: The Essential Writings and Speeches, ed. James Melvin
Washington (New York: HarperCollins, 1986), 299.
30. Peter Hampson, “Theology and Psychology,” in
Christianity and the
Disciplines: The Transformation of the University, ed. Oliver Crisp, Gavin
D’Costa, Mervyn Davies, and Peter Hampson (London: Bloomsbury, 2014),
119–20.
31. Gunton,
Triune Creator, 183. Or, in Wolfhart Pannenberg’s terms, “our
destiny . . . is brought to fulfillment by Jesus Christ.”
Systematic Theology,

-- 133 of 236 --

trans. G. W. Bromiley (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997), 2:210.
32. Dallas Willard,
The Divine Conspiracy: Rediscovering Our Hidden Life in
God (New York: HarperCollins, 1998), 35–39.
33. We owe this insightful analysis of the literature to David N. Entwistle and
Stephen K. Moroney, “Integrative Perspectives on Human Flourishing: The
Imago Dei and Positive Psychology,”
Journal of Psychology and Theology 39,
no. 4 (2011): 295–303.
34. Lydia Kim-van Daalen, “The Holy Spirit, Common Grace, and Secular
Psychotherapy,”
Journal of Psychology and Theology 40, no. 3 (2012): 229.
35. Colin Gunton and Robert W. Jenson, “The
Logos Ensarkos and Reason,”
in
Reason and the Reasons of Faith, ed. Paul J. Griffiths and Reinhard Hütter
(London: T&T Clark, 2005), 83.
36. Oliver D. Crisp, “A Christological Model of the
Imago Dei,” in
Ashgate
Research Companion to Theological Anthropology (Burlington, VT: Ashgate,
2015), 225.
37. Barth,
Church Dogmatics III/2, 132.
38. Colin Gunton,
The Promise of Trinitarian Theology (New York: T&T Clark,
1997), 186; Gunton,
Christ and Creation (Milton Keynes, UK: Paternoster
Press, 1992), 30.
39. Jason McMartin, “The Theandric Union as
Imago Dei and
Capax Dei,” in
Christology Ancient and Modern: Explorations in Constructive Theology, ed.
Oliver D. Crisp and Fred Sanders (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2013), 136–50.
40. J. Wentzel van Huyssteen, “Theology, Science, and Human Nature,”
The
Princeton Seminary Bulletin 27, no. 3 (2006): 201.
41. John Webster, “The Human Person,” in
The Cambridge Companion to
Postmodern Theology, ed. Kevin J. Vanhoozer (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003), 228.
42. Susan A. Ross,
Anthropology: Seeking Light and Beauty, Engaging
Theology: Catholic Perspectives (Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press, 2012), 139.
43. For an elaboration on the dynamism of human personhood, see Jack
Balswick, Pamela E. King, and Kevin Reimer,
The Reciprocating Self: Human
Development in Theological Perspective (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic,
2016).
44. Gunton,
Christ and Creation, 101.
45. Gunton,
Christ and Creation, 107.
46. Warren Brown and Brad D. Strawn, “Self-Organizing Personhood,” in
The
Ashgate Research Companion to Theological Anthropology (New York:
Routledge, 2015), 96–97.

-- 134 of 236 --



-- 135 of 236 --



-- 136 of 236 --

5
Research Psychology as
Experimental Theology
Key takeaways from this chapter:
We can know God more deeply in and through scientific exploration
of the created order.
Psychological science can be celebrated and critiqued from a
theological perspective.
Psychological research does not provide an exhaustive account of the
human, but it does enable wisdom by helping us avoid error.
Theology and psychology are not in conflict; they are complementary
forms of knowing our world.
If I (Kutter) am being perfectly honest, I’ve always been a bit of a
mystic. In fact, some of the most vivid memories from my childhood
involve moments when I would lie on my back staring up at the
summer sky, watching the gentle rustling of the leaves on the trees,
awestruck by the sheer beauty and elegance of the world that
surrounded me. In these moments, however sporadic and fleeting
they may have been, the whole of the created order seemed to be
saturated with a kind of energy that held all of its various parts
together. Words are inadequate to describe these experiences, but
Gerard Manley Hopkins comes close when he says that “the world is
charged with the grandeur of God.”1 It was as if the rocks, the trees,
the wind, and the sky were all conspiring together, calling me to
know the natural world on a deeper level—to explore its many

-- 137 of 236 --

intricacies, to be ever more curious about its numerous
eccentricities, to appreciate its infinite complexity.
Scripture is filled with similar descriptions of God speaking through
the created order. Consider the following verses:
The heavens declare the glory of God;
the sky displays his handiwork. . . .
Its voice echoes throughout the earth;
its words carry to the distant horizon.
Psalm 19:1, 4
For since the creation of the world his invisible attributes—his eternal
power and divine nature—have been clearly seen, because they are
understood through what has been made.
Romans 1:20
Just as the poetry of the psalmist and Paul’s letter to the Romans
suggest, one of the great mysteries of creation is that it is indeed
capable of communicating information about God’s glory and power
and nature to us. But something more was taking place on those
warm summer evenings when I was a child, something far more
elemental. Charged as it was with God’s grandeur, the material world
was not simply speaking to me or delivering information to me but
was inviting me into a deeper form of communion with the One
whose Spirit makes reality itself a possibility.
In more ways than one, these early experiences of witnessing “the
heavens declare the glory of God” (Ps. 19:1) have motivated most of
my life’s work, both theological and psychological. My fascination
with the beauty of the created order motivated my studies in
theological aesthetics, which has been the focus of most of my
research, writing, and teaching as a theologian. At the same time,
the undeniable elegance of the natural world compelled me to
dabble for most of my life in the natural sciences and, eventually, to
pursue a second PhD in psychological science. I love generating
speculative theories about humanity’s capacity to see and
understand God’s “invisible attributes” in and through the beauty of
“what has been made” (Rom. 1:20), but the theology of creation we

-- 138 of 236 --

outlined in chapter 2 would also suggest that the material world
itself harbors evidence of God’s ongoing presence and activity. In
fact, the apostle Paul goes one step further, claiming that the
entirety of God’s project in the world hinges on the empirical
falsifiability of the bodily resurrection of Jesus as a concrete
historical event. “If Christ has not been raised,” says Paul, our faith is
not only “useless,” but “we should be pitied more than anyone”
(1 Cor. 15:17, 19).
This is not to suggest that we can (or ever will) “prove” that the
resurrection happened or that God exists through modern scientific
means. Nor does it mean that the apostle or the psalmist shared the
same concerns as contemporary people when they wrote about
creation’s capacity to disclose certain of God’s attributes. These
authors knew nothing of the scientific method or contemporary
modes of empirical research. This is simply to say that people of
Christian faith can and should approach scientific inquiry with a
sense of enthusiasm and gusto, exploring both human and
nonhuman creation with the confident expectation that, in doing so,
they are developing a more robust and intimate understanding of
their Creator. In this regard, the psychological sciences serve as a
perfect example. By engaging in psychological research that explores
the underlying dynamics of people’s thoughts, emotions, and
behaviors, we not only gain insight into what it means to be human
but also come to a deeper understanding of the God in whose image
human beings are made.
This chapter considers the theological significance of psychology
as a research science, motivated by the prospect of knowing God
more deeply by exploring what God has created. The reasons for
this particular focus are twofold. The first is the simple fact that not
everyone studying psychology will end up being a therapist. Nor
should they! Experimental research is indispensable for the practice
of psychology. It informs the various theoretical frameworks that
clinicians adopt in their practices and provides evidence-based
resources that enable therapists to determine the interventions best
suited for the specific needs of their clients.

-- 139 of 236 --

The second reason is that, from a historical perspective,
contemporary psychological researchers come from a long line of
women and men who pursued research science because they too
wanted to know more about the amazing world we inhabit and, by
doing so, to come to a deeper and more intimate understanding of
the God who created it.2 As a result, for centuries, scientists
(psychological and otherwise) conceived of their life’s work as fully
commensurate with their Christian vocation. To engage in the
production of knowledge as a psychological scientist was not a mere
personal interest or even a profession; from a theological
perspective, it was a calling. And we believe the same can be said
for those conducting experimental research on the leading edge of
psychological science today.
Thus, the primary goal of this chapter is to draw on the theological
categories we have covered so far in order to understand more fully
the ways in which the Christian faith might enable students of
psychology to engage both critically and constructively in the task of
psychological research. To do so, however, we need to first unmask
a particularly pernicious narrative about the aims and origins of
modern science that threatens to undermine this goal before we
even begin.
On the Origins and Aims of Modern Science
A long-standing and fairly influential definition of theology can be
found in the work of eleventh-century theologian Anselm of
Canterbury, whose theological motto was “faith seeking
understanding” (
fides quaerens intellectum).3 Anselm and other pre-
Enlightenment philosophers who embraced this turn of phrase were
not suggesting that “faith” (i.e., what one believes based on
nonreflective intuition or the testimony of others) could or should be
replaced by “understanding” (i.e., what one believes based on
reason), as if faith were a deficient or inferior form of knowledge.
Rather, for Anselm, faith is the necessary precursor and precondition
for any knowledge at all. There simply is no form of human

-- 140 of 236 --

reasoning or any other kind of psychological process that can be
separated from our precritical faith commitments. Or, to borrow from
Trevor Hart, a contemporary theologian whose work echoes this
historic perspective, all human thought is “faith thinking.”4
If the first thought that comes to your mind in response to
Anselm’s motto is that it might work perfectly fine for theology
because theology is all about faith, but it does not apply to science
because science is all about setting faith aside in order to pursue
some kind of objective knowledge, you would not be alone. In fact,
one of the more common narratives regarding modern scientific
inquiry is that it is capable of delivering a detached, purely objective
take on the world—what might be called “epistemological
objectivity.” In certain respects, this is not an entirely unfounded
view. One of the main reasons that the gold standard of
experimental design features randomized controlled conditions to
which participants and researchers are all “blind” is because
researchers want to remove the influence of human subjectivity from
their studies as much as possible. But the scientific method itself
forces us to acknowledge that, although the data this kind of
research generates can be both credible and reliable (i.e., we have
good reason to trust it), it is not “objective” in any absolute sense.
In fact, the scientific method doesn’t allow for any finding to go
without qualification. The scientist merely accepts or rejects null
hypotheses based on statistical probabilities and, in doing so, is
always making provisional claims that are by definition never final
and always open to falsification.5
So the problem isn’t science. The problem is that an overly
simplified story regarding the historical relationship between the
sciences and the Christian faith has created a series of artificial and
often misleading distinctions between the various ways that humans
come to know and understand their world (i.e., epistemology). For
instance, a common assumption that is prevalent among scientists
and laypersons alike is that faith and science constitute two mutually
exclusive, even antithetical domains of knowledge, and, as such,
have always been in conflict. Popularized over the course of the past

-- 141 of 236 --

few decades by scientists from various subdisciplines like Carl Sagan,
Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris, and Daniel Dennett, and more recently
by the likes of Neil deGrasse Tyson, this narrative suggests that
modern science was birthed during the “dark ages,” a time when
religious institutions and leaders actively squelched any knowledge
that might undermine their authority or threaten their grip on power.
As the story goes, thanks to an intrepid group of scientists and
freethinkers who were committed to pursuing the truth at any cost
(e.g., accusations of heresy, excommunication, or even death),
citizens of Western societies were eventually able to break free from
the religious dogmatism that kept them in a state of oppression and
servitude and enter a world illuminated only by the light of scientific
truth. The conclusion that naturally follows from this historical
narrative is that, as scientific knowledge advances, religion and its
many trappings will one day disappear altogether, rendered obsolete
by a much more sophisticated understanding of reality that has
moved far beyond the naivete of our religious past.
The problem with this story is that it is at best incomplete and at
worst misleading. As historian Brad Gregory has argued, not only
were most of the first modern scientists in the West people of
Christian faith who were exploring the natural order as created by
God, but the great majority of the institutions that supported their
expensive and painstaking efforts were church-sponsored
universities, research societies, and religious orders committed to
the promotion of knowledge about the material world.6 It is also the
case that, as psychological scientists Malcolm Jeeves and Thomas
Ludwig have pointed out, the conflicts involving science and faith
that have arisen over the past two millennia have been real and
consequential, but they have been almost entirely conflicts between
competing scientific paradigms (endorsed by Christians on both
sides) or competing theological frameworks (endorsed by scientists
on both sides) and not between science and faith.7 A well-known but
largely misunderstood example is the 1633 trial of Galileo, during
which “his judges rightly considered themselves supported by the
mainstream science of their age and the previous millenia. . . .

-- 142 of 236 --

Galileo’s support came mainly from theologians and church leaders,
including disciples of the Benedictine mathematician Benedetto
Castelli, and . . . the archbishop of Sienna Ascanio Piccolomini.”8 In
other words, Galileo’s accusers—all of whom were Christians—
rejected heliocentrism based on prevailing scientific accounts of the
universe. In contrast, his supporters—all of whom were Christians—
defended his claims based on an emerging scientific paradigm that
was incompatible with geocentrism. Whatever antagonisms might
have existed between science and Christianity during this episode
and others like it, they were negligible compared to the enthusiastic
embrace of science by Christians.9
There is some truth to the story, but it has little to do with the
inevitable eclipse of religion by the sciences. Rather, the reality has
more to do with the unintended consequences of the enthusiasm
with which Christians embraced the sciences, coupled with the
Protestant Reformations. As the Reformers sought to challenge a
number of the abuses that were, in their mind, endemic to the
hierarchical structures and ecclesial practices of the Roman Catholic
Church, an open question arose regarding how church leaders and
lay Christians could determine whose theological position was the
most faithful.
Sola Scriptura (Scripture alone) was a foundational
doctrinal principle held by many of the Reformers, but in the
absence of papal authority, to which authoritative sources might
Christians appeal in order to know whose interpretation of Scripture
was correct? In many cases, the natural sciences became the third-
party arbiter of these theological disputes, in large part because they
were perceived to be (1) objective, (2) based in natural laws that
were universal in scope, and (3) essentially agnostic with respect to
theological doctrine. Thus, in a somewhat counterintuitive move,
rather than turning toward theological resources, Christians during
the period of the Protestant Reformations drew on the natural
sciences to support their theological claims precisely because they
were not theological.10
As it turns out, though, when it comes to questions of theology,
science gives with one hand while it takes with the other. The

-- 143 of 236 --

primary reason for this is because the governing assumptions of
science that allow it to explain natural phenomena and produce ever
greater knowledge of the natural world—epistemological objectivity,
methodological naturalism, and functional atheism—serve as the
very principles that disqualify religion or religious experience as
legitimate objects of scientific inquiry, much less reliable or
trustworthy sources of human knowledge.
As Gregory points out, the decision to turn to the natural sciences
as the primary means for answering theological disputes produced a
number of unintended consequences:
Whether the natural world was God’s creation or not, the [scientific]
explanation of those regularities did not depend on theology or morality
and was intellectually separable from them via amoral methodological
naturalism. . . . Science enables human beings to do increasingly
extraordinary things in manipulating the natural world but says nothing
and can say nothing about what we should do or why we should do it. It
is definitionally amoral. Yet power is overwhelmingly concentrated in the
hands of political leaders and the wealthy, who are thus in a position to
enact their moral preferences through the technological applications of
science in disproportionately influential ways.11
The end result of this separation of science from faith is that the
sciences are now in the midst of an identity crisis. The psychological
sciences are not unique in this regard, but among the social and
behavioral sciences, and even in comparison to some of the physical
sciences, psychology continues to maintain a fairly rigid adherence
to metaphysical naturalism as a discipline, almost to a fault. From a
historical perspective, psychology emerged as a direct descendant of
the Western intellectual tradition, which is indelibly Christian, and
the modern scientific tradition, which was born from and animated
by Christian commitments. Yet, given its dual commitment to the
predictability of creation on the one hand, and the naturalist
tradition on the other, there is now a question as to what this
“science” is, how it functions in society, and how trustworthy and
accurate its most basic moral, political, and legal claims are.12

-- 144 of 236 --

We name these historical assumptions and this identity crisis not
to suggest that the psychological sciences should be discounted or
disregarded as untrustworthy or fundamentally flawed. Instead, we
name them so that we can critically reflect on them, opening them
to critique and refinement by the broader intellectual community,
which is what we now aim to do by drawing on the constructive
theological categories we have developed in previous chapters.
Because we will be building on the material we developed in
chapters 2 and 3, some of the following will already be familiar to
you. However, our focus here will be on the practical application of
constructive theology for those engaged in the practice of
psychological research.
A Constructive Critique of the Metaphysics of the
Psychological Sciences
Constructive theology is neither indiscriminate celebration nor pure
critique; rather, it’s an exploration of both the benefits and
drawbacks of every human endeavor. The psychological sciences
serve as a perfect example. Governed as they are by the
metaphysical assumptions of methodological naturalism,
epistemological objectivity, and functional atheism, psychology
presents the person of Christian faith with incredible tools for
understanding human thoughts, emotions, and behaviors, but these
are not uncomplicated tools. In order to use them well, students of
psychology need to be able to recognize the limitations of the
methods and tools of psychology, especially in those instances where
theology might offer a substantive contribution to psychology’s
understanding of the human person and the world humans inhabit.
As it concerns the metaphysical assumptions of the psychological
sciences, the theological tradition provides people of Christian faith
with resources for critiquing these assumptions and offering a
constructive response when they are found wanting. Let us look at
each of the assumptions we discussed in previous chapters as a way
of demonstrating what a response of this sort might look like.

-- 145 of 236 --

Methodological Naturalism
Recalling chapter 2, methodological naturalism implies a reduction
of all that can possibly be known about reality down to observable
material phenomena and nothing more. It is a view of the natural
order as just that: nature. In other words, it is not the view of the
Christian theological tradition, which has long claimed that the
natural order is, in fact, created by a Creator. As such, creation is
structured in a way that reflects the trinitarian God who made it,
which is to say, as a dynamic, relational reality. To emphasize this
distinction does not mean that one has to believe in a trinitarian
Creator God in order to know anything about the world or human
beings. However, a theology of creation does raise important
questions about how those who operate within a naturalistic
framework understand their obligation (if any) regarding the natural
order of things. If the world and the humans in it are “nothing but”
their materiality, then psychological scientists have no real obligation
to relate to them in any particular way while doing empirical
research.13 But if both human beings and the nonhuman world are
created, then all our endeavors—scientific or otherwise—are better
understood as a response to that initial creative act. We are
“respond-able” to creation; we are obligated to respond to the world
as agents who are caught up in a web of deep relationality with both
human and nonhuman creation. In and of itself, nature places no
such obligations on us. Thus, a theology of creation expands on
psychology’s methodological naturalism, providing psychological
scientists with the intellectual resources and philosophical rationale
for why the humans they study are rightly understood not as objects
of scientific inquiry, but as subjects to whom they are related and
morally responsible.
Epistemological Objectivity
“Epistemology” is just a technical term for the branch of
metaphysics concerning what can be known, and as we have said
before, epistemological objectivity is the notion that science is
capable of delivering objective knowledge about the world. But it is

-- 146 of 236 --

also both more and different than that. For many, the objectivity of
scientific knowledge is thought to be superior to other forms of
knowing, so much so that it will one day be capable of providing an
exhaustive explanation of each and every observable phenomena—a
complete account of reality itself.14 Importantly, though, exhaustive
explanations of the world are simply a means to another end. Rather
than merely knowing more about the natural order, scientific
knowledge of this sort is ultimately aimed at mastering it. The
assumption of epistemological objectivity, along with the privileging
of this form of knowledge above all others, sets the stage for a
vision of science that is both without any limits and self-evidently
good.
But as philosophers of science from Thomas Kuhn to Nancey
Murphy remind us, the knowledge science delivers is, in fact, limited,
and in the absence of an appropriate level of humility before our
data, science can (and in some cases does) cause a great deal of
harm to the humans who wield it, especially in the hands of those
who seek mastery over the natural order.15 Of course, from a
theological perspective, this stands to reason. God grants humans
“dominion” over nonhuman creation in Genesis 1:28, but dominion
does not mean domination, nor does it mean mastery or an
unrestrained manipulation. Dominion here is better understood as a
command for humans to harness creation’s potential for the sake of
its flourishing. In the passage that immediately follows, God places
Adam and Eve in the garden and commands them to “care for”
(‘abad) and “maintain” (
shamar) it (Gen. 2:15), further underscoring
that, as creatures themselves, humans are not masters of the
created order but stewards of it. Creation is not the territory on
which humans exert their will to power but the garden they are
tasked with cultivating.
For the student of psychology who is also a person of Christian
faith, the notion of epistemological objectivity need not be
abandoned, only reframed. The kinds of knowledge produced by
scientific explorations are indeed reliably true. They are also
potentially good, but only insofar as they are utilized in ways that

-- 147 of 236 --

lead to the flourishing of both human and nonhuman creation. From
this view, it is neither possible nor preferable to master nature
through the production of objective knowledge. What is more, when
located within a larger theological framework, epistemic humility is
not an impediment to scientific progress but serves as its necessary
condition.
Functional Atheism
In certain respects, a functional atheism follows quite naturally
from the methodological naturalism and epistemological objectivity
that prevails within the sciences in general and the psychological
sciences in particular. To be clear, there is nothing inherently wrong
with nontheistic accounts of natural phenomena, psychological or
otherwise. The issue is rather that, within the sciences in general
and the psychological sciences in particular, atheism often functions
as a totalizing narrative. It not only dictates what is and is not a
legitimate object for scientific inquiry but also determines the
explanations that scientists are free to entertain as they interpret the
data they collect. If this were simply a reflection of the scientific
community recognizing the limits of the scientific method and
acknowledging that certain phenomena fall outside the bounds of
empirical research, that would be one thing. But the real-world
implications of this functional atheism are that the humans engaged
in the production of scientific knowledge (i.e., scientists) tend to
overreach in their estimation of what science can tell us about the
world, and the science-consuming public often follows suit. Shorn of
its theistic origins as an exploration of the created order, modern
science is forced to bear a burden it was never meant to bear. Not
only does it have to explain to us what it has discovered through
rigorous experimentation but it is now also responsible for
determining whether, how, and to what end those findings ought to
be applied. The problem with this expectation is that science qua
science is not equipped to function in this manner. It is a descriptive
project, not a prescriptive one.

-- 148 of 236 --

This was the very crisis that Nietzsche’s madman recognized when
he shouted for anyone who would listen, “God is dead! God remains
dead! And we have killed him!”16 It is important to note that
Nietzsche’s madman was not talking to Christians, and his
proclamation was in no way exultant or celebratory. Instead, he was
expressing a deep sense of anguish and disillusionment to his
modern secular counterparts—to the women and men who thought
that, given the clearly superior forms of knowledge provided by
scientific progress, they could easily do away with silly superstitions
like “God” and still somehow maintain the moral compass that God
provided. Nietzsche is often disregarded by Christians given his
explicit critiques of Christianity, but people of faith engaged in the
psychological sciences would do well to keep the madman’s warning
in mind. To operate with the assumption that the sciences offer a
total accounting of human life that can also provide us with answers
to our deepest ethical dilemmas is a fool’s errand.
Again, this is not to say that science is somehow bankrupt through
and through, or that its deliverances are fundamentally suspect. If
anything, it’s quite the opposite. The sciences can and do provide us
with reliable solutions for many of the problems that ail us and offer
an unparalleled means for human flourishing. But on their own and
in isolation, they are an incomplete and inadequate resource for
directing our lives. Knowing this, Nietzsche suggested that we should
all have the courage to take the functional atheism of the sciences to
its logical end and move completely beyond any notion of “good”
and “evil” that we have inherited from our morally oppressive
religious traditions. That’s one option. A Christian theology of
creation, however, would suggest something a bit different—to
reconceive of scientific explorations of the created order not as an
atheistic or even agnostic enterprise but as a creative collaboration
with the God who made it.

-- 149 of 236 --

Celebrating Psychological Science as Collaborative
Cocreation
Now that we have outlined a few of the ways Christians might
respond critically and constructively to the metaphysical assumptions
of the psychological sciences, we can explore some of the ways
people of faith might draw on a theology of creation in order to
celebrate the contributions of the sciences. As we have discussed in
previous chapters, science as a tradition assumes the knowability of
creation, and it is also a tradition that can and does reveal God’s
presence. If we understand that what psychology and psychologists
are doing has to do with the creative capacities humans are
endowed with as stewards of God’s creation, that should
fundamentally change our approach to psychological science.
Psychology is not “mere science” but is a creative capacity to shape
creation and to steward and name aspects of creation. All the
sciences are to some degree about classification and naming. But
our naming of the world (and its phenomena) as psychologists
creates a niche within that creative world with which we interact
creatively. In turn, that niche re-creates us. Psychology is thus about
collaborative cocreating. Let’s consider three ways in which the
psychological sciences might enable humans to engage in exactly
this kind of collaborative cocreation.
Pursuing Evidence in a Post-truth World
One of the key ways psychological science provides a means for
collaborative niche-making can be found in its pursuit of empirical
evidence to ground its claims. Because the cognitive and perceptual
capacities of the human creature are attuned to the structure of
creation itself, we are able to know the world as intelligible (though
complex). Although this is a deeply theological claim, it does not
depend solely on theological commitments. Numerous evolutionary
psychologists, many of whom explicitly reject any kind of theistic
beliefs themselves, have noted the ways in which the architecture of
the human mind has developed in order to navigate and respond
creatively to our environment, including the emergence of a near

-- 150 of 236 --

universal capacity for belief in supernatural agents.17 This of course
does not mean that humans are equipped to know everything about
their world. As the author of Ecclesiastes reminds us, the ultimate
meaning of reality is something that will always elude us to some
degree (Eccles. 3:11). It is, most fundamentally, a mystery. But
mystery does not mean unknowability or irrationality; rather, mystery
implies that there is too much to know. The created order is, in the
final analysis, inexhaustible. And it is this very inexhaustibility that
animates human creatures to explore their material surroundings
through empirical means, pursuing an ever deeper but never
complete understanding of the evidence they discover.
Indeed, if Paul’s claims in Romans 1 about the knowledge of God
that can be found in creation are true, then psychological scientists
who are people of Christian faith should have no fears regarding
what they might discover through their empirical research. But we
can make an even stronger claim: if our theological understanding of
human thought, feeling, and behavior is not in some way vulnerable
to empirical data, then something is actually wrong. As we noted
above, we always need to keep in mind the limits of scientific
knowledge and the limits of human capacity to know (e.g., 1 Cor.
13:12), but for the Christian, empirical evidence doesn’t just matter,
it matters ultimately. To be sure, demonstrable evidence has always
mattered in this way. Remember Paul’s injunction to the church in
Corinth: “If Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is futile
and your faith is empty” (1 Cor. 15:14). But in a post-truth society in
which “alternative facts” are entertained as true, and Christians are,
statistically speaking, the subgroup in American society most
skeptical of scientific findings, people of faith who are competent
empirical researchers are needed now more than ever.18 In such a
time as this, we can celebrate the scientific goals of objectivity and
agnosticism in the face of empirical evidence as a means for drawing
closer not just to “the facts” but ultimately to truth.

-- 151 of 236 --

The Wisdom (and Folly) of Predictive Research
The history of psychology as a predictive science capable of
influencing human behavior is riddled with cautionary tales. A prime
example can be found in the work of a handful of psychologists in
the behaviorist tradition who advocated for an approach to
psychological interventions that verged on social engineering. For
psychological scientists like David Hartley, J. S. Mill, and B. F.
Skinner, human behavior could be explained (and predicted) in terms
of the ways in which external stimuli condition people to respond
through either positive or negative reinforcement.19 Of course,
behind this push to explain human thought and behavior in terms of
empirically observable events was the assumption that the world
generally and human society specifically were progressing. So
proponents of empirical observation and analysis within the
psychological sciences were not simply advocating for better
methods of measurement, replication, and predictability. Theirs was
a much grander vision than that. Experimental science was nothing
less than the key to human progress—to the flourishing of the
individual and the well-being of society as a whole.
In the wake of the various cataclysmic events of the twentieth
century (e.g., two world wars, nuclear holocaust, eugenics), most of
which were made possible by advances in modern science, these
utopian hopes have proven to be misplaced. That being said, to
understand human psychology from an empiricist standpoint is to
acknowledge the incredible benefits of the predictive research
sciences. Indeed, what Augustine called “
scientia” is the kind of
knowledge produced through reasoned reflection—when one refuses
to take a conclusion for granted or to accept a given theory
uncritically.20 It is an approach to knowledge that highlights the
value of measurable data and analyses not because they are
infallible but because they allow for public inquiry and debate from a
community of learned researchers around a shared object of
concern. It is also an approach that admits that reason and
observation, while helpful tools, are themselves flawed and
incomplete. In other words, in its purest form, the empiricism that

-- 152 of 236 --

has shaped the historical development of psychological science is
less about proving with absolute certainty what is true than it is
about the wisdom of avoiding predictable errors.
For instance, in the statistical hypothesis testing most commonly
employed by psychological scientists, there are two kinds of errors:
type 1 and type 2, which are more commonly known as false
positives and false negatives. In terms of statistical probabilities, the
only real way to decrease the chances of accepting something as
true when it isn’t, or rejecting something as false when it isn’t, is to
increase the size of the sample being studied. Even then, because
there is always a chance that an experiment might be flawed or in
need of further development, both the method and results of the
experiment are made public so that others can attempt to replicate
its findings.
To put this a bit differently, psychological scientists seek to
decrease the odds of misunderstanding human thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors by studying samples that are larger and more
representative of the general population and then making their
findings available to a wider community of scholars for correction
and refinement. This approach has direct and immediate implications
for both lay Christians and professional theologians who are often
guilty of constructing theological theories based on a limited data set
and without concern for the broader theological community. For
instance, without denying the real significance of one’s personal,
subjective experience, much can go wrong theologically when
definitive conclusions are drawn about God, humans, or the world in
which we live based on a data set of one (i.e., my individual
experience alone). In the absence of a larger sample size, the
probability of making a type 1 or type 2 error is greatly increased.
What is more, without a broader theological community—both
historic and local—contributing to the analysis of these subjective
experiences, individual interpretations are not held up to critique and
correction, and thus are more prone to error.
The danger of committing these kinds of errors is only amplified in
an age of (dis)information overload, especially when there seems to
be equally legitimate anecdotal evidence for just about any and

-- 153 of 236 --

every theological theory. So, what is needed now is not necessarily
more or better information, but rather
wisdom—a mode of
discernment that leads away from rather than toward predictable
errors. The psychological sciences provide Christians with helpful
tools that enable them to move in this direction with confidence, in
no small part because the basic assumptions of predictive research
align with a theology that would suggest the created order operates
in ways that are, on the whole, stable over time and reliably
coherent. Statistical inferences drawn from empirical data are by no
means error free. Nor are they ideologically or theologically neutral.
Still, in the absence of empirical support, wisdom is empty. Likewise,
without wisdom, data is blind. Or, as Augustine might say,
sapientia
depends on
scientia, and vice versa.
Thriving as Bridging the Nature-Niche Gap
As we discussed in chapter 4, the classical Western theological
tradition has exerted a great deal of energy examining sinfulness
and human depravity. Likewise, modern psychology, which also
emerged from the Western intellectual tradition, has focused at
times almost exclusively on the pathologies and maladaptive
behaviors that inhibit mental health. In other words, the primary
orientation for both fields of inquiry has been the healing of what is
broken rather than the flourishing of what is whole. More recently,
however, some psychological scientists have shifted the emphasis of
their research from fixing what is broken to exploring how and under
what conditions people thrive. In light of the theology of thriving we
developed in chapter 4—one that reconceives of the
imago Dei as a
dynamic and ongoing process that moves the human beyond total
depravity—we can celebrate these shifts as fully commensurate with
God’s larger project in the world.
For instance, in their most recent work, experimental psychologists
Justin Barrett and Pamela Ebstyne King have suggested that because
humans actively create the conditions to which later generations
respond, one of the keys to thriving is to consider how our niche-
making might generate environments that are more rather than less

-- 154 of 236 --

conducive to the “maturationally natural” cognitive capacities of
human beings.21 According to Barrett and King, by adjusting our
niche-making in light of experimental research and the findings of
evolutionary developmental psychology, we are able to bridge the
gap that often exists between the structures of our mind and the
structures of contemporary society, thereby promoting the
flourishing of both human and nonhuman creation. In doing so, we
are actively leveraging the contributions of the psychological
sciences in order to collaborate with the Spirit of God in the world,
cocreating niches that allow humans to thrive.
Sketching the Contours of an Experimental Theology
To recap, the biblical witness (e.g., Ps. 19; Rom. 1), the historic
theological tradition (from Augustine to Anselm to Aquinas), and our
own personal experience (as psychological scientists and laypersons)
all suggest that something can be known about God in and through
an exploration of the world God created. Thus, the claim we have
developed in this chapter is that the human capacity to discern God’s
presence and activity in and through the things that God has made
holds true for the sciences in general as well as the psychological
sciences specifically. By engaging in psychological research that
explores the underlying dynamics of people’s thoughts, emotions,
and behaviors, we not only gain insight into what it means to be
human but also come to a deeper understanding of the God in
whose image human beings are made.
Regardless of whether you personally resonated with (or even
agreed with) every aspect of this chapter, if our basic description of
psychology as a research science has in any way affirmed your own
emerging sense of calling as a student of psychology, then we will
consider it a success. That being said, the reason our hopes for this
chapter are modest is simply because not everyone is called to the
task of experimental research—neither every person of Christian
faith nor every psychologist. But for those who are, a few
implications follow that we would all do well to consider.

-- 155 of 236 --

First, no researcher and no research project is completely or
absolutely objective. Importantly, this is not a theoretical or
philosophical claim; it is, rather, concrete and empirical. The simple
fact is that every form of inquiry is contextual. Not only does each
research project have a horizon beyond which it cannot see but
every researcher inhabits a particular social location that serves as
the interpretive lens through which all data is filtered. What Hans-
Georg Gadamer once called “prejudices” psychological scientists now
call “content biases,” which are the suite of cognitive processes with
which every human being operates.22 Content biases shape how
researchers gather, analyze, and understand quantitative data. Every
human being develops their cognitive capacities within a particular
sociocultural location, which means these biases can operate
implicitly, informing how researchers may unconsciously classify
members of racially, sexually, and socioeconomically marginalized
groups.23 Every psychological scientist needs to be vigilant in naming
and accounting for these biases, but Christians have an intensified
obligation to do so given their theological understanding of humans
and the world they inhabit as God’s good-but-fallen creation. This
does not mean that we can ever do away with our biases entirely.
Again, there is no such thing as purely objective research. But it
does call for a deeper and more pronounced commitment to cultural
humility—a willingness to acknowledge all that we do not know and
to recognize the limits of our research and of ourselves as
researchers.
Second, when viewed from a theological perspective, the ultimate
end of psychological science is justice (this will be discussed further
in chap. 7). The first and potentially most critical step toward this
goal is to identify and make explicit one’s social location—that is, to
reckon with our blind spots and account for them with wisdom and
humility. But the psychological project as a whole cannot remain
focused on the individual alone, or even the human alone. Rather,
for psychological scientists to contribute to a more just and equitable
society, a world marked by God’s shalom, their research needs to
address the broader systems and structures that create the

-- 156 of 236 --

conditions for injustice in the first place. Psychological research is
not a passive description of phenomena but an active construction of
the world we inhabit, which means that each of our research
projects bears the potential for creating a niche that either prevents
or enables the flourishing of its inhabitants. To be sure, this is a
goal-oriented vision of psychological science, but it is not meant to
suggest that experimental research could ever possibly fix all the
injustices that plague society today. Rather, it’s a way of imagining
the task of psychology as contributing in its own unique way toward
a much larger project, the consummation of which John envisions in
Revelation as a newly created niche—one in which the tears,
mourning, and pains of injustice will be no more because God will be
fully and wholly with us (Rev. 21:4).
Third and finally, our exploration of the theological significance of
the psychological sciences points toward what might be called an
“experimental theology.” We have defined this elsewhere as an
approach to the Christian faith that “employs the research methods
and psychometric instruments of the psychological sciences to
construct theological theories capable of generating empirically
testable hypotheses.”24 Some would reject this notion out of hand,
based on the assumption that experimental theology is not actually
doing theology, “for theology is not the kind of thing amenable to
scientific experimentation.”25 But as we have hopefully demonstrated
throughout this book, theology is a lived practice by which we
pursue broader knowledge about God and a deeper, more intimate
knowledge of God. If it is the case that we can come to know God in
and through what God has made (Rom. 1:20; Ps. 19), and that faith
is always a faith seeking understanding, then theology is not only
amenable to scientific experimentation; it demands it.
Questions for Reflection and Discussion

-- 157 of 236 --

1. What does it mean practically for the telos of psychological
science to be justice? How does that change your approach to
your own work in the field?
2. Where have you encountered tension with the metaphysical
assumptions of the psychological sciences?
3. Other than creation, incarnation, and the doctrine of the Spirit,
are there any other theological concepts that help you engage in
psychological research?
4. Where do you see gaps between people and the niches they
inhabit? How might your work in psychological science help
bridge this gap?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
Barrett, Justin L., with Pamela Ebstyne King.
Thriving with Stone Age Minds:
Evolutionary Psychology, Christian Faith, and the Quest for Human
Flourishing. Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2021.
Jeeves, Malcolm A, and Thomas E. Ludwig.
Psychological Science and
Christian Faith: Insights and Enrichments from Constructive Dialogue.
West Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press, 2018.
Murphy, Nancey.
A Philosophy of the Christian Religion. Louisville:
Westminster John Knox, 2018.
1. Gerard Manley Hopkins, “God’s Grandeur,” in
Poems and Prose (New York:
Penguin Books, 1985), 27.
2. “From Copernicus through Galileo to Newton and beyond, most early
modern investigators of nature’s regularities understood themselves to be
discovering the rationality with which God had imbued his creation.” Brad S.
Gregory,
The Unintended Reformation: How a Religious Revolution Secularized
Society (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2012), 379.
3. Anselm,
Proslogion II, accessible at
https://sourcebooks.fordham.edu/basis/anselm-
proslogium.asp#CHAPTER%20I.

-- 158 of 236 --

4. Trevor Hart,
Faith Thinking: The Dynamics of Christian Theology (Eugene,
OR: Wipf & Stock, 2004).
5. “The court of science never passes a final judgment, but constantly re-
evaluates the evidence to arrive at our current understanding. . . . The
evidence will win out in the end. Science . . . is not perfect, but science is still
our best bet for understanding the world around us and for improving our
lives.” Venki Ramakrishnan, as cited in Malcolm A. Jeeves and Thomas E.
Ludwig,
Psychological Science and Christian Faith: Insights and Enrichments
from Constructive Dialogue (West Conshohocken, PA: Templeton Press, 2018),
49.
6. Gregory,
Unintended Reformation, 379.
7. Jeeves and Ludwig,
Psychological Science and Christian Faith, 34–35.
8. Jeeves and Ludwig,
Psychological Science and Christian Faith, 26.
9. As Michael J. Buckley observes, “Many of the natural philosophers (as
they were called at the time) believed that they could ground the apologetic
argument better than the theologians. A good number of theologians seem to
have concurred, and with that concurrence they signed on to the history that
this dependence would effect.”
Denying and Disclosing God: The Ambiguous
Progress of Modern Atheism (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004), xiii.
10. In his multivolume examination of the rise of modern atheism and its
origins in domains that were equally religious and scientific, Buckley suggests
the following:
The lesson that emerges is that one cannot—in an effort to justify, found,
or confirm assertions of the reality of God—bracket or excise religious
evidence and religious consciousness and the interpersonal that marks
authentic religious life and experience. . . . The most compelling witness
to a personal God must itself be personal. To attempt something else as
foundation or as substitute, as has been done so often in an effort to
secure by inference the reality of God, is to move into a dialectical process
generated by internal contradictions of which the ultimate resolution must
be atheism. (
Denying and Disclosing God, xv–xvi)
11. Gregory,
Unintended Reformation, 380.
12. Again, citing Gregory,
Besides its countless contributions to human flourishing, the application of
scientific findings has also contributed to untold destruction and human
suffering, especially in the past century. Nor is this surprising, because
science itself does not prescribe nor can it even suggest whether, how, or
to what ends its findings should be applied. These are moral issues, about
which the findings of science per se can say nothing. . . . The intellectual
foundations of modernity are failing because its governing metaphysical
assumptions in combination with the findings of the natural sciences offer

-- 159 of 236 --

no warrant for believing its most basic moral, political, and legal claims.
(
Unintended Reformation, 380–81)
13. We owe the language of “nothing but” to Don MacKay,
The Clockwork
Image: A Christian Perspective on Science (Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity,
1974), 72.
14. The era otherwise known as the Enlightenment ushered in a time in
which data and empirical inquiry were elevated and, in many ways,
absolutized as the only real instruments of knowledge. For a fuller picture of
the Enlightenment’s influence on scientific and theological knowledge, see
Edward Farley,
The Fragility of Knowledge: Theological Education in the
Church and University (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1988). What is more, from the
time the word “psychology” began to be used in the way it is used today, the
people using it wanted to be engaged in science, not philosophy. In fact, as
experimental science developed its capacity to explain the operations of the
natural world through the scientific method, psychological scientists
increasingly turned to empirical data as the only authoritative source for any
kind of knowledge—psychological or otherwise. See Eric Shiraev,
A History of
Psychology: A Global Perspective (Los Angeles: Sage, 2011), 104–16.
15. For an excellent historical analysis of the modern naturalist tradition and
its implications for science, see Nancey Murphy,
A Philosophy of the Christian
Religion (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2018).
16. Friedrich Nietzsche,
The Gay Science (The Joyful Wisdom), trans.
Thomas Common (Lawrence, KS: Neeland Media, 2009), 79.
17. Indeed, a few of the more prominent psychologists engaged in this area
of research are Paul Bloom,
Descartes’ Baby: How Child Development Explains
What Makes Us Human (London: William Heinemann, 2004); Pascal Boyer,
Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought (New York:
Basic Books, 2001); Justin L. Barrett,
Cognitive Science, Religion, and
Theology: From Human Minds to Divine Minds (West Conshohocken, PA:
Templeton Press, 2011); and Jesse Bering,
The Belief Instinct: The Psychology
of Souls, Destiny, and the Meaning of Life (New York: Norton, 2012).
18. For a recent study examining the links between American Christianity
and science skepticism, see Elaine Howard Ecklund, Christopher P. Scheitle,
Jared Peifer, and Daniel Bolger, “Examining Links between Religion, Evolution
Views, and Climate Change Skepticism,”
Environment and Behavior 49, no. 9
(2017): 985–1006.
19. See, for example, B. F. Skinner,
The Behavior of Organisms (Acton, MA:
Copley, 1938); and Skinner,
Science and Human Behavior (New York: Free
Press, 1953).
20. Augustine,
On the Trinity, trans. Stephan McKenna in
The Fathers of the
Church: A New Translation, vol. 45 (Washington, DC: Catholic University of

-- 160 of 236 --

America Press, 1963).
21. Justin L. Barrett, with Pamela Ebstyne King,
Thriving with Stone Age
Minds: Evolutionary Psychology, Christian Faith, and the Quest for Human
Flourishing (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2021), 26.
22. Gadamer explores the notion of prejudices and their role in human
understanding in
Truth and Method (New York: Continuum Books, 2004). It is
somewhat anachronistic to suggest this is an equivalent concept to content
biases, but the point is that, just like the term “prejudice,” the word “bias”
should not be understood in a negative or pejorative sense but rather in a
purely descriptive sense. It is inescapable that humans interpret and
understand the world through their own particular lenses and cannot do
otherwise.
23. A helpful article elaborating on the dynamic interaction between
cognitive biases and culturally learned implicit biases is Perry Hinton, “Implicit
Stereotypes and the Predictive Brain: Cognition and Culture in ‘Biased’ Person
Perception,”
Palgrave Communications 3 (2017),
https://doi.org/10.1057/palcomms.2017.86.
24. Kutter Callaway and Brad Strawn, “Experimental Theology: Theological
Anthropology and the Psychological Sciences,”
Journal of Psychology and
Theology 48, no. 1 (2020): 3–4.
25. J. T. Turner, “On ‘Experimental Theology,’”
Analytic Theology, July 2,
2018, http://analytictheology.fuller.edu/on-experimental-theology.

-- 161 of 236 --

6
Clinical Psychology as Practical
Theology
Key takeaways from this chapter:
Our emotional world is a vital way that God communicates with us.
People are more than their diagnosis, and the labels a community
uses to describe mental health disorders say as much about the
community as they say about an individual.
When Christian communities create authentic spaces where
difference is embraced, those with mental health diagnoses are
offered freedom from the oppression of stigmatization and are also
included as full-fledged members of the body of Christ.
As a collaboration with the Spirit of God, psychotherapy shines a light
on unconscious patterns of behavior and attempts to lift them to
conscious awareness so that persons may change.
I (William) remember the first time that I started going to a
psychotherapist. I had moved to Los Angeles from Fort Worth,
Texas, to start my PhD in theology at Fuller Seminary. I did what a
lot of students do when they move to a new city; I rented an
apartment and found a couple of part-time jobs that would help me
pay for my books, rent, and some tuition. My jobs were working in a
church as a part-time pastor and covering some shifts as a server at
California Pizza Kitchen (I can still tell you what goes on their BBQ
chicken pizza). Although I loved the people and the work I did with
the church, I was frequently visited by a loneliness that can easily

-- 162 of 236 --

come to those who work and serve in ministry settings. I was
starting to form some friendships, but between my doctoral studies
and my job in the church, I had little time to be as social as I
wanted. Being in a new city and just getting to know people, I was
also unprepared for the emotional work it would take to do PhD
coursework and serve in ministry. Over a short time, I began to feel
a deep disconnect between my academic studies in theology (which
I loved) and the actual place where people in my church were in
their own spiritual journeys. The members of my church
demonstrated an earnest and honest desire to follow God, alongside
real-life struggles that any of us could have, like how to deal with
family conflicts, drug or alcohol abuse/addiction, divorce, career
discernment, and coping with depression or anxiety. My academic
studies in theology had done very little to prepare me for these
“real-life” issues, leaving me unsure how to support these church
members as they dealt with all that life threw their way. To make
things more difficult, I held beliefs about who I needed to be as a
leader that put undue pressure on myself to always have the right
answers and do things perfectly. I’ll freely admit, I’m a recovering
perfectionist. The combination of these elements often made me feel
unable to help others or even to take care of myself. It wasn’t long
before I realized that simple answers to these questions did not
exist, and I needed some help.
If you’re not accustomed to asking for help, going to a therapist or
counselor can be quite a humbling experience—or at least that is
how I found it to be at first. It requires us to ask for help and to
admit that we don’t know everything. In other words, it puts us in a
position of vulnerability. What I learned was that to even step
through a therapist’s office door is to take a risk, and it’s a risk that
requires courage. And just an aside, whether you’re training to be a
clinical psychologist or not, going to therapy yourself is something
that you really must do.
As I progressed through therapy, what I found was a deep
disconnection with parts of myself. I had neglected my own
emotional states of sadness and loneliness for quite some time. In
addition, I held some theological ideas about emotions and

-- 163 of 236 --

emotional states that made me believe that I didn’t need to attend
to these parts of myself. I realized that I had coped with these
feelings of sadness or loneliness in a way that did more damage
than good. Instead of acknowledging my emotions of sadness or
loneliness, I would ignore or push down these parts of myself, press
myself into my work (whether in studies or ministry), try to
rationalize or think about my emotions instead of feeling them, push
myself to do more, and then criticize myself when I didn’t feel like I
had done enough. Doing this over and over again throughout my
adolescent and young adult years had made me a master at ignoring
my feelings and emotions. But, as Brené Brown aptly talks about in
her book
Daring Greatly, it’s impossible to numb certain emotions
without numbing others.1 When we numb or ignore sadness and
loneliness, we also numb our experiences with joy.
In addition to this, the theology of my childhood had taught me
that you couldn’t rely on your feelings or emotions because feelings
and emotional states could mislead you. Back then, my knowledge
of God and my own spirituality was very much based on a rational
faith that disregarded the body and emotions. It’s not that faith
doesn’t have a component of reason, but much of my life I lived with
a theology that didn’t regard our bodies and emotions as significant,
perhaps even central, to our spiritual lives. I had never even
considered that God might be speaking to me through my emotional
states, and I never considered until therapy that God was giving me
important information about my own pain.
Needless to say, therapy caught me off guard. My therapist, Rick,
pointed out to me that God can be working in and under and
through our emotional states. One of the first things I learned in
therapy was that the ways we relate to ourselves can be ungodly
and even cruel. Many times, these patterns of how we relate, treat,
and speak to ourselves occur without us even realizing them. As I
moved through my first year of therapy, I began to understand parts
of myself better. What I found was that I was extremely afraid of
being seen as inadequate and that I felt inadequate much of the
time. My feelings of inadequacy made me feel like I had to do more.

-- 164 of 236 --

And yet when I did more, this kept me socially isolated and
contributed to my feelings of sadness or loneliness. These insights
alone were enough for me to begin to make changes, and when I
asked what God would want to say to these sad and lonely parts of
myself, I found that God wanted to speak to these places and bring
wholeness to these aspects of my life. These parts of internal
suffering were not absent from God’s love and grace. I also learned,
as Peter Scazzero discusses in
Emotionally Healthy Spirituality, that
our emotional world is a vital way that God communicates with us
and is intimately connected with our spiritual life.2
Almost twenty years later, I’m still in therapy and continue to find
it a valuable place where I grow and learn about God, others, my
own relational world, and my own blind spots. I’m convinced that
God doesn’t want us to neglect these parts of our inner life and that
God speaks to us through our emotions and our emotional world.
There are many Christian churches, families, and communities that
value the inner, contemplative, and emotional life. At the same time,
there are many churches, families, and communities that do not—
and instead operate with theological views of human personhood
and emotions that cause harm. Much of the theology we have
developed in chapters 1 through 5 is a corrective to some theological
beliefs that discount the role of the emotions and the body, which is
why, in this chapter, we aim to offer a constructive theological
appraisal of clinical psychology from the perspective of one’s
Christian faith.
Psychotherapy from the Perspective of Christian Faith
To understand psychotherapy from the perspective of Christian
theology we must do two things. We must first deconstruct (or dis-
integrate) theologies found in certain church cultures that are
damaging regarding mental health (like thinking that our spiritual life
is disconnected from our physical bodies or that we should ignore
emotional and bodily states that God also created). Second, we must
deepen and broaden some of the existing Christian theological ideas

-- 165 of 236 --

that are found in Scripture but that are not regularly discussed in
churches or integration classes in order to gain a fuller perspective
of God’s role in healing in a relational context like psychotherapy.
Deconstructing Theologies That Are Harmful to
Mental Health Treatment
In a critique of Western mental health perspectives, Ethan
Watters’s book
Crazy Like Us outlines how aspects of American
psychology have brought “Western” conceptions of mental
conditions and illnesses to other countries, much to the detriment of
some cultures.3 In one chapter, Watters focuses on anthropologist
Juli McGruder, who traveled to Zanzibar to research schizophrenia.
McGruder’s research focused on the following question: Why do
people diagnosed with schizophrenia in developing nations have a
better prognosis over time than those living in industrialized nations?
Working from an anthropological perspective, McGruder noticed that
the relationship between the person with schizophrenia and their
family was remarkably different than those in urban Western
cultures. In a non-Western culture like Zanzibar, families were less
reactive to the diagnosis, did not isolate the family member with
schizophrenia, and had a narrative around the diagnosis (often a
spiritual narrative) that created connection and empathy for the
person with schizophrenia.4
From this research, Watters points out how relational and social
connections can be lost through a label or diagnosis. More
specifically, if a mental health diagnosis becomes the primary
determinant for how we relate to those with mental illness, then the
relational and social connections that are vital to one’s personhood
are diminished. Watters’s conclusion is that Western psychologists
are trained to make a diagnosis, but the diagnosis keeps some from
seeing and relating to a person in their entirety. The result is that
the whole person is often missed by excessive focus on disease or
mental illness. Because Western psychology has often operated from
a “disease” model, the emphasis has been on what is wrong with a
person instead of the things that are going right. These similar

-- 166 of 236 --

convictions were the impetus for Martin Seligman’s turn toward what
he called positive psychology, which emphasized what is going right
with people, and studying qualities and virtues that contribute to
positive health and positive mental health. Following Seligman, Mark
McMinn has pointed out that positive psychology moves from a
pathology model (where we simply focus on what is wrong) toward
a health model (where we describe positive attributes of mental
health). Positive psychology also asks what contributes to thriving
and optimal development, positive coping strategies, and virtues that
help people cope.5
We are also indebted to the work of Charles Taylor, who argues in
Sources of the Self that individualistic and Western notions of the
self and personhood have resulted in contemporary
depersonalization and disengagement within wider society.6 The
intellectual trends that impacted theology, philosophy, and
psychology were seventeenth- and eighteenth-century rationalist
conceptions of humanity. From this view, not only are humans
essentially minds, but it is only through our minds that we can
discern the world, and the mind is of greater importance than bodily
states and emotions. Historically, much of modern Western society
(after the seventeenth century) has overlooked the personal and
communal dimensions of human personhood. However, this
Enlightenment trend is counteracted through a trinitarian framework
that stresses the relational, social, and embodied dimensions of
personhood. In keeping with the trinitarian approach to psychology
presented earlier, we can acknowledge that God’s presence is wide
and at work in the process of psychotherapy, just as God can also be
in the field of medicine or research psychology or the arts.
It was American psychiatrist Karl Menninger (founder of the well-
known Menninger Clinic) who noted that religion has been the
“world’s psychiatrist throughout the centuries.”7 All major world
religions contain frameworks that impact a psychology of human
personhood and offer visions for how healing should take place.
Christianity is no different in this regard. In fact, Christian theology
and Christian communities (in all their varied forms) contain an

-- 167 of 236 --

understanding of what it means to be human and what healing
consists of. The Greek word “
psyche” is often translated as “soul” in
English translations of the New Testament, but it can also be
translated “self” or “personality.”8 It is from psyche that we derive
our terms “psychology” and “psychiatry.” Even these connections
between terms suggest an overlap in the common interests of the
inner life of humanity that both Christianity and psychology share.
Although the Christian understanding of healing will differ from all
the ways psychology conceives of healing, Christian notions of what
it means to be human and what it means for humans to experience
healing will nonetheless be translated in terms of how a particular
tradition or church community addresses mental illness and their
views on psychotherapy. A Christian community’s theologies of
creation, humanity, salvation, and the body are key doctrines that
will directly impact whether that church or community upholds the
importance of mental health treatment.
Likewise, the various theories that operate within psychotherapy
each take shape within a tradition of psychological inquiry, but
theories of psychotherapy represent practical and applied methods
of research psychology. More importantly, though, engaging in
psychotherapy over time directly impacts our way of being in the
world—that is, the way we relate to ourselves and others. In fact,
the more we learn about attachment, neuroscience, and emotions,
the more we understand about the connection that exists between
the brain and the mind, how our emotional states are foundational
elements of constructing relational “maps” of ourselves and the
world around us, and how these affective maps allow us to form
secure attachments to others.9
Christianity throughout the centuries has a lot to say about ways
of being in the world. However, the Protestant conservative Christian
church in the United States (especially within the past century) has
often reduced the Christian faith down to a simple decision to “follow
Jesus” or a one-time cognitive affirmation of Jesus as Lord, instead
of emphasizing a lifelong, developmental process of being shaped
and formed by the Spirit of God. The result is a theology of salvation

-- 168 of 236 --

and healing that reduces redemption to a spiritual state that
neglects the whole person.
Toward a Whole-Person Approach to Mental Health
Recall from our discussion in chapters 3 and 4 that God actively
upholds the life of the human creature and the created realm and
takes no pleasure in the death of even those who are wicked (Ezek.
18:23). God’s love extends far beyond the bounds of only the “elect.”
It reaches out to the whole world, motivated by a desire that all
people everywhere come to know greater wholeness and abundant
life.10 We are dependent on God for life, whether we recognize it or
not. Job 34:14 informs us that God is intimately connected with
sustaining our lives, and if God withdrew God’s Spirit, then all of
humanity would perish. God as the creator sustains this “very good”
creation and speaks a continual “yes” to the human creature and the
created realm.11
While psychotherapy is not a religion (though some forms of
psychoanalytic societies can become religion-like), both clinical and
developmental psychology do a good job of acknowledging the
lifelong process of being shaped and formed in and through our
relationships. In this regard, Christian spirituality and certain forms
of psychotherapy often overlap because of their shared interest in
bringing healing to the human predicament.12 Indeed, God’s Spirit
can work through folks like psychotherapists to bring about healing
in large part because the (trans)formation of persons happens—or
doesn’t happen—through the ways that our personal relationships
are ordered. This transformation occurs as God’s Spirit is actively
involved in every domain of our lives, so while we acknowledge that
psychotherapy does not bring salvation, it nevertheless can be
viewed as a relational process that God can and does use to bring
restoration to people’s lives. As a consequence, Christians who work
as clinical psychologists are doing their part to shape and form their
particular niche within the created order, partnering with the Spirit to
direct humans toward wholeness.

-- 169 of 236 --

Dimensions of Relationality
As mentioned previously, a trinitarian understanding of God
emphasizes the relational components among God, humanity, and
the world (chaps. 1 and 2). This interdependent, reciprocal notion of
God’s relationality offers a helpful corrective to aspects of
individualism and depersonalization found in some Western
philosophies and psychologies. More specifically, the five relational
dimensions of human life (discussed briefly in chap. 4) highlight
Christian theology’s emphasis on the social, communal, and
relational elements of how God made us, which helps inform our
conception of psychotherapy. As humans, we stand in relationship
with (1) God, (2) other humans, (3) our own selves, (4) other
nonhuman animals, and (5) the earth. As we look at psychotherapy
through the eyes of Christian faith, we note that God’s Spirit moves
and works in every aspect of this relational matrix, and we also
understand that when any of these relationships are broken,
misguided, or disjointed, we are not living the fullest life that we can
live. Psychotherapy focuses on many of these relational dimensions
in order to bring about healing. Thus, from a Christian theological
perspective, we can see how clinical psychologists are able to help
patients have a fundamentally different kind of relationship with
their own “self” and with others, thereby moving them in the
direction of wholeness.
Nevertheless, in some Christian communities, knowledge of “self”
or self-reflection can be seen as a selfish activity, which causes
certain Christian communities to teach instead that one’s focus
should only be outward, on the needs of others. Yet, the Christian
theological tradition has a strong precedent for self-reflection as a
way to know God and better understand God’s Spirit working in our
lives. Our theological forebears recognized that to be human means
that we have some degree of relationship with our own selves. As
John Calvin noted, there is a reciprocal relationship between
knowledge of God and knowledge of ourselves.13 And as we see in
Scripture, there is already a degree of respect and care for one’s
own self that is assumed in the command to love our neighbor as

-- 170 of 236 --

ourselves (Matt. 22:39). In short, the command to love our neighbor
assumes that we have some degree of healthy awareness of and
respect for our own selves.
That being said, self-awareness and respect for one’s self are not
the same as selfishness. Self-awareness requires us to live in an
appropriate degree of gratitude to God for the life and gifts that
have been given to us, along with a recognition of our limits as finite
creatures created by an infinite God. For example, theologian
Anthony Hoekema reminds us that one’s self-image can be “either
inordinately high (in the form of sinful pride) or excessively low (in
the form of feelings of shame or worthlessness).”14 And we know
from our studies in psychology that either extreme in how we view
ourselves (an excessive obsession with self or a disbelief in any self-
worth) can be problematic. As we think about sanctification and
transformation by the Spirit, we must at some level begin to believe
and experience that we are valued and loved by God. And before we
can treat others in a different way, we sometimes need to relate to
our own self in a way that is commensurate with the reality that
there is no condemnation in Christ Jesus (Rom. 8:1). Indeed, for
students studying psychology, one of the most important (and
difficult) lessons to learn is that God’s Spirit also works to restore the
relationship that we have with our own self.
Many of the clients that come from a faith background with whom
I (William) work in psychotherapy believe that God loves them and
that they are valued. But the way they criticize themselves can many
times be quite harmful. Often these critical and violent ways of
treating ourselves become most evident when we are in pain,
embarrassed, or feel shame that comes from the voices of parents,
siblings, caregivers, church leaders, or even our younger selves that
we have internalized. Psychotherapy can be a place where we begin
to develop healthy forms of self-awareness and self-respect. To be
clear, when we talk about self-awareness, we are speaking about
directing our attention so that we can engage in sustained reflection
on our thoughts, feelings, and actions that we have toward
ourselves. When we increase our capacity to reflect on these

-- 171 of 236 --

thoughts, feelings, and actions, we also develop a greater ability to
reflect on our actions toward others and may better discern what
God might want to say to us in this process. Because the five
relational dimensions of human life are the very realms that God
restores, it makes sense that one of the ways these realms can be
restored is through a relational process like psychotherapy.
Incarnation and the Work of the Spirit through
Psychotherapy
God is a relational God and has created humans as relational beings.
We exist fundamentally in relationship whether we acknowledge this
or not, and God interacts in the world through God’s “two hands,”
the Son and Spirit.15 Two key Christian theological themes that
inform the work of psychotherapy that we will now highlight are the
doctrine of the incarnation and the doctrine of the Holy Spirit
(pneumatology). Both of these doctrinal themes help to
conceptualize how we might understand God working in the process
of psychotherapy, how God might use the uniquely personal
encounter that psychotherapy provides, and how, for Christian
psychologists, psychotherapy can embody the four key biblical
themes of restoration, healing, justice, and love.
The Incarnation of the Son
In recalling what we established in chapter 4, we remember that
God’s incarnation sets the precedent for us entering the world of
another person. The incarnation is about God’s embodied presence,
and the power of the gospel is rooted in how God took on flesh as a
human person in Jesus Christ. Wholeness and healing can be aided
through psychotherapy, and restoration occurs as God’s Spirit works
in the lives of individual people, with the additional acknowledgment
that God also works through other people to bring healing and
restoration. We talked previously about how shalom is the way God
intended things to be, where God’s justice and peace reign supreme,
where relationships are rightly ordered toward love instead of toward

-- 172 of 236 --

greed, hate, or violence, and where the oppressed are set free.
While God could have brought restoration to creation and persons in
another way, God chose to bring restoration and healing in a very
material and bodily way in Jesus Christ.
As David Kelsey has noted, being made in the image of God
means we “image the image of Christ” and do things like Christ
does.16 Part of that imaging is to be in the world in a way that Jesus
was by bringing about restoration and healing. Here we must
remember that psychotherapists often act as an embodied (and
incarnated) form of love for their clients or patients. Simply taking
the time to sit with another human being and turn toward them with
love and respect helps create a hospitable space in which people can
flourish and healing can occur. Christ’s work of salvation is an
affirmation that Christ came to restore and redeem
all aspects of
human existence, and this includes our bodily, spiritual, and
emotional lives. Viewed from this perspective, psychotherapy can be
understood as one of the places where God’s Spirit can move to
bring restoration to the emotional realms of our existence.
The promise of presence, specifically God’s presence, is one of the
most powerful themes that runs throughout Scripture. God’s
presence is a consistent theme in the Hebrew Scriptures as God
promises through a covenant to be present with Abraham and Isaac
(Gen. 15:17; 26:24). When Moses and the Israelites doubted or
were afraid as they made the journey out of Egypt and into the
promised land, the reminder was that God would be present with
them (Exod. 3:12; 33:14; Lev. 26:12). And the frequent message
that God gave to the children of Israel through the prophet Isaiah
and the prophet Jeremiah was “Do not be afraid,” followed by the
promise “for I am with you” (Isa. 43:5; see also Jer. 1:8; 42:11).
When we look at the New Testament, we find that these are also
the bookends presented in the Gospel of Matthew. “God with us” is
the meaning of “Emmanuel” in Matthew 1:18. We find the promise
again when Jesus commits to be present any time two or three are
gathered in his name (18:20). And we find it yet again in the last
statement of Matthew’s Gospel where Jesus promises to be with his

-- 173 of 236 --

followers even to the end of the age (28:20). In our pain, in our
suffering, in our fear, the message of Scripture is clear: God does not
abandon us or forsake us but remains with us, guides us, and suffers
with us. We find that Scripture is also clear about the difficulties and
suffering that we will encounter in this life, but it is in and through
these difficulties—not in spite of them—that God promises never to
leave or forsake us (Deut. 31:6; Heb. 13:5). God became incarnate
in Jesus (John 1), and the Gospels are a testimony to the
embodiment of God’s love, power, and presence in the person of
Jesus.
The promise of God’s presence might raise a question though.
How exactly is God with us today? As Christians, we believe that the
Spirit of Jesus is with us all the time, whether we recognize it or not.
Richard Rohr helpfully reminds us that we are already in the
presence of God, and what is often absent is our awareness of God’s
presence.17 God is working in our lives whether we acknowledge
God’s presence or not. And while God is with us through the Spirit,
what we also find is that God frequently gives us embodied
reminders of God’s presence through people who actually
“incarnate” the love and mercy of God to us. Most often we think of
these people as pastors, priests, youth leaders, or mentors.
However, it is also the case that clinical psychologists can perform a
similar function, especially through certain practices like
psychotherapy, where there is an emphasis on relational healing
through virtues like justice, love, hope, and grace (which will be
discussed in our next chapter).
In short, God can become more real to us through the process of
psychotherapy because God is working through a psychotherapist
who is the embodiment and incarnation of love, justice, peace, and
mercy. On the other hand, any time a psychotherapist (or church
minister!) does not practice love, justice, peace, and mercy in their
relationships with others, damage can be done. Just as God
promises to be present with us, we are often reminded of God’s
presence and power in our lives through healing relationships that
incarnate God for us in real and tangible ways, and psychotherapy is

-- 174 of 236 --

one of those places where the Spirit of God can and does work to
bring restoration.
The Pervasive Presence of the Spirit
To be clear, in no way are we arguing for psychotherapy as a
substitute for the work of salvation, nor are we suggesting that
psychotherapy fulfills the purpose and function of mission in the way
that church does. Moreover, we are not holding up psychotherapy as
an alternative or replacement for the embodied formation (and
transformation) that occurs within the community of faith. What we
are arguing is that, viewed from a theological lens and given what
we established in chapter 3 regarding God’s wider presence,
psychotherapy can be used by God’s Spirit to bring about restoration
and healing as God works in the lives of both the psychologist and
the patient. Although psychotherapy does not function in the same
ways that discipleship does in the context of Christian community,
the work that is done in therapy can be spiritually nurturing and
transformative. Given that many forms of popular church culture in
the United States conceive of spiritual growth and transformation as
occurring only within the walls of the church, it is important to
recognize the broad and wide dimensions of God’s presence and
power through the Spirit, which necessarily includes the realm of
psychotherapy.
To practice or pursue psychotherapy is therefore to participate in
the ongoing work of the Spirit, whose movements are always
inclined toward justice, peace, restoration, and freedom for the
oppressed. Here we recall Luke 4:18–19, which we first mentioned
in chapter 4. In this passage, Jesus is moved by the Spirit to
proclaim good news to the poor, release for captives, recovery of
sight for the blind, and freedom for the oppressed. One way to
interpret what Jesus means by release from oppression in the Gospel
of Luke is “freedom from both diabolic and social restrictions.”18 In
the New Testament era, widows, orphans, the physically disabled,
the poor, and prisoners were the common victims of marginalization.
In contemporary society, many of these same groups are still

-- 175 of 236 --

marginalized, but we need to expand the list to include Black
persons, Indigenous persons, persons of color, those suffering with
mental illness, and the homeless. This list is by no means
exhaustive, but people in each of these groups have experienced a
history of oppression by cultural and systemic forces in the United
States, and they continue to suffer from what can only be described
as “diabolical social restrictions.” The good news that Jesus
proclaimed is that the work of the Spirit is to bring freedom from this
kind of oppression and to move those who were once “outside” and
living on the margins to being those who are now on the “inside.” It
is the great reversal that takes place in the kingdom of God. The
outsiders are now welcomed as being valued and loved. The
disenfranchised are welcomed to the table to eat with Jesus. We find
very clearly that power, wealth, and privilege are not the scales that
are used by God to weigh the value and worth of a human life.
In terms of what this looks like in psychotherapy, the practice of
creating space for others (and those whom we might perceive as
different from ourselves) is indicative of the Spirit’s work in the
world. Even more specifically, the creation of space for those who
have mental illness is one of the ways psychotherapy can be seen as
a movement of the Spirit who works through human action to create
a life-giving space for others. It is important to note that it is the
Spirit’s activity that enables humans to participate in this divine
project by creating certain spaces (like the church) that are
hospitable for human life.19 In this way, the spiritual life of Christian
communities creates “authentic human reality in the here and now”
and allows persons to see beauty and dignity in those who might be
different from themselves.20 Empowered by the Spirit, humans are
able to move toward more authentic living with themselves, others,
and God.21 But the Spirit also works to create unity amidst diversity
—enabling persons and communities to engage in relationships with
others in and through their differences. And when this occurs, those
with mental health diagnoses are offered freedom from the
oppression of stigmatization and are also included in the body of
Christ: the church.

-- 176 of 236 --

Toward a Theology of Clinical Psychology
From a Christian perspective, the work of psychotherapy can be
framed within the justice narrative of Scripture. We are called to
participate in the same kind of work that Jesus did for those who are
oppressed. We can definitively say that the majority of folks who
seek treatment through therapy are encountering some degree of
emotional and psychological suffering and pain. Seen in this way,
psychotherapy can be a place to move beyond a narrative about
what is primarily “wrong” with persons (and labeling them with a
mental health diagnosis) and instead create a hospitable space for
persons to talk about their experiences with mental health.
Moreover, psychotherapy, from a Christian perspective, enables us to
see beyond a diagnosis and grant people the dignity and worth that
is endowed by their Creator. Richard Butman and Mark Yarhouse
note that even in the midst of “incredible brokenness, it does not
lessen the worth or dignity of each person we encounter. Practically
speaking, this could mean that we have something to learn from
each person in every encounter—if only because they bear the
image and likeness of God.”22 Similarly, Scottish theologian and
mental health nurse John Swinton reminds us that we need to see
persons with mental illness as created and vivified by the Spirit of
God, persons whose unique mental health experiences hold
meaning.23 And when located in a theological framework of common
grace, it becomes clear that clinicians who function as mental health
providers have been graciously given gifts to care for those who are
often overlooked in our society. These gifts of God’s common grace
do not bring salvation, but they are graciously bestowed on people
so that God’s goodness may shine forth. They provide a foretaste of
shalom
—a glimpse of God’s coming kingdom where persons are
whole human beings.24
Consequently, Christians may understand their work in
psychotherapy as participating with God in redeeming patterns of
human thought and behavior by helping folks understand how they
relate to themselves, others, and the world around them. Or to use

-- 177 of 236 --

the language introduced in chapter 4, the work of psychotherapy
can help persons
discover new things about themselves and
develop
these patterns in a direction that is pro-social or adaptive. In many
cases, the relational patterns that we are unaware of are often the
patterns that cause the greatest difficulties in our relationships. With
this in mind, we might understand the work of therapy as helping
patients to discover how patterns of the past cause one to act in
certain ways (often unknowingly) in their relationships and even
toward one’s own self.
According to Warren Brown and Brad Strawn, Jesus “made it clear
that embodied and socially embedded ministry in a physical world is
at the heart of the Gospel.”25 Given the embodied nature of the
gospel, we can also see how change and transformation have an
inherent
social aspect.26 And in fact, this movement toward a fully
embodied, psychosocial wholeness is something that can begin in
the proximate areas of existence between the clinician and client.
Indeed, we can trust that the Spirit of God is at work in these
spaces, leading those who are children of God (Rom. 8:9–10, 14) as
they commit their clinical work to Christ.
If clinical psychology is a discipline that participates in the work of
God in redeeming patterns of human behavior by helping people
understand how they relate to themselves and others, then sin can
be understood as something that we consciously choose to do;
however, it can also include unconscious, destructive patterns of
relating to others or to one’s own self. Negative patterns of relating
can’t always simply be seen as conscious decisions to sin, since
destructive ways of relating to ourselves and others are the result of
us being sinful
and the result of us being sinned against. Many of
the internalized ways that we talk to ourselves we have inherited
from our parents or caregivers. How many of us as parents have
caught ourselves saying or doing something that our parents did,
something that we vowed never to do? Or how many of us have
found that the ways we deal with pain, anger, or sadness are similar
to our caregivers’ or parents’ patterns of behavior? If the voices that
we have internalized have been critical, hateful, or destructive, then

-- 178 of 236 --

often the ways that we deal with ourselves and others are shaped by
those internalized voices of criticism or hatefulness. While Christian
theology provides a broad framework for understanding humans as
malleable and shaped by social and environmental factors (1 Cor.
15:33), psychotherapy can help illuminate behavioral patterns that
we (often unknowingly) act out within our relationships.
Mark McMinn similarly observes that the work of psychotherapists
is to help patients “discover previously unexplored areas of their
lives” by “peeling back the defensive cover of life and exploring the
parts of life that are rarely considered.”27 In parallel to McMinn, we
have argued that Christ’s Spirit works to bring wholeness to the
psychological and emotional aspects of our person, and this
wholeness occurs within the created, material, and proximate realm
of human existence (not only in a spiritual realm or the eschaton).
Growth and change happen best, both behaviorally and spiritually, in
healing relationships, and these forms of transformation are possible
not only within the church but also through other practices—like
psychotherapy. Healing relationships help us change by connecting
us with someone supportive, kind, and loving—someone who has
our interests in mind.
Clinical psychology’s understanding of human behavior provides
clarity regarding certain aspects of why humans act the way they do.
In addition, it helps clarify the underlying conditions and motivations
for both positive and negative behavioral patterns. Through
psychotherapy, one’s negative behavioral coping styles can be
discovered, and, amazingly, God has made us with the capacity to
recognize insights about ourselves that we did not know before.
Once relational patterns are discovered, both the psychotherapist
and the patient can work to develop these patterns of behavior
toward wholeness, with the recognition that negative patterns of
relating are usually rooted in real pain or hurt from the past.
Christian Scripture outlines how all humanity is caught up in
behavioral patterns that are sinful and how each person embodies
practices that are harmful to others and one’s self (whether we
recognize it or not, e.g., Rom. 7).

-- 179 of 236 --

We are consciously aware of some of these destructive behavioral
patterns, but others occur without us knowing about them.
Sometimes we do consciously choose to relate in negative ways with
other humans, but many times we relate wrongly because of ways
that we have been sinned against. In doing so, we act out of our
own woundedness. Illumination in both of these areas is necessary.
While some people are actively aware of their harmful behaviors,
there are also patterns that remain outside of conscious awareness.
Broadly speaking, psychotherapy shines a light on unconscious
patterns of behavior and attempts to lift them to conscious
awareness so that persons may change.
Psychologists Robert Stolorow, Bernard Brandchaft, and George
Atwood outline aspects of these unconscious processes through
what they call the “prereflective unconscious.”28 While there are
different aspects of the unconscious, the prereflective unconscious
does not normally enter our self-awareness, forged as it is during
early development through affective engagement with primary
caregivers.29 Patterns of behavior that form the prereflective
unconscious, according to Stolorow, can move into conscious
awareness through the sustained empathic inquiry of another. These
elements of the prereflective unconscious emerge in the subjective
space (the transference) between two persons.30 In other words, as
Paul Ricoeur has also suggested, social relations mediate self-
awareness and self-consciousness.31
For example, while we all experience and feel the emotion of
anger, the way we negatively cope with anger differs from person to
person. Terry Hargrave and Franz Pfitzer describe several coping
mechanisms: some withdraw; some blame others; some shame
others or themselves through criticism; some may avoid
responsibility or escape through emotional cutoff, alcohol, or drug
use; or some may become violent or have outbursts of rage.32
Generally speaking, how we negatively cope with anger constitutes a
relational pattern in which we usually become “stuck” because it is
part of our prereflective unconscious. Stolorow characterizes these

-- 180 of 236 --

patterns as “unconscious organizing principles.”33 Importantly, it is
not that we are overwhelmed with too many ways to cope with
anger (or too many organizing principles to help us think about
anger); in reality, most of us have too few coping mechanisms.
Common grace allows us to understand that, even at the level of
the prereflective unconscious, there are elements of truth that are
worth discovering within the cognitions, behaviors, and emotions of
human persons. It is therefore possible to see the work of
psychology, and more specifically the practice of clinical psychology,
as finding and developing these areas of truth that people possess
and helping them understand their own patterns of behavior. We can
discover truths about creation because God has fashioned a world
that will disclose its secrets to those who inquire. Moreover, the
Christian experience is informed by the basic belief that the Spirit of
God works to bring wholeness to the psychological and emotional
aspects of our person. Informed by a trinitarian understanding of
creation, aspects of this wholeness can and do occur within the
created realm. Because God created a world that is knowable to
those who inquire, Christian psychologists can see part of their work
as helping others to understand their own relational patterns and
develop these to bring people into reconciliation with themselves
and others.
Concluding Remarks
In this chapter we have argued that, from a Christian perspective,
clinical psychology can be seen as a way to participate in God’s
project of bringing wholeness and healing to the human creatures
whom God loves. This vision of clinical psychology turns on the
theological claim that God’s Spirit brings forth good things through
psychology, whether a particular psychologist acknowledges this or
not. As mentioned earlier, truth about the world is accessible through
a practice like psychotherapy not because it proves the existence of
God or explicitly discusses spiritual matters, but because God has
ordered a world that is knowable to the one who investigates and

-- 181 of 236 --

explores. This knowability includes behavioral patterns that can be
discovered through psychotherapy. While psychology is the study of
human thought and behavior, it can also be understood theologically
as one way humans explore and shape creation. God has created
humans with the unique ability to wonder, dream, and develop the
created realm, and clinical psychology is one form that this kind of
exploration and development takes. With this in mind, we offer a few
points concerning how we might move the conversation forward
regarding mental health and the church.
First, mental health diagnoses, while useful for mental health care
professionals, should not be the only labels that define persons—
whether in psychotherapy or in the church. Often, mental health
diagnoses have been wrongly used to name persons rather than
their behavior, and as John Swinton rightly notes, diagnostic
categories do not tell us who a person is or help us understand the
broader narrative that is the fabric of their life.34 Complicating
matters further, the inappropriate usage of diagnostic categories by
nonprofessionals within the church often contributes to
stigmatization and social suffering. When a mental health diagnosis
becomes the only lens through which people are seen, these
diagnostic labels contribute to a narrative about persons that
perpetuates ostracization and enhances pessimism about recovery.35
In contradistinction to the diagnostic categories given by the fifth
edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Swinton suggests that the church should understand mental health
issues as distinctive experiences that disrupt people’s personal
narratives and require care and respect, alongside rehabilitation and
treatment.36 According to Swinton, because there is a tendency for
people not only to “have a diagnosis but to become a diagnosis,”
pastors and lay leaders should call for a moratorium on diagnostic
mental health labels being used in the church community.37 In
regard to psychotherapists using diagnostic criteria, this of course is
part of their job. But early career psychologists in particular must
take care not to let diagnostic labels define persons in their entirety,

-- 182 of 236 --

and the Christian values of love, grace, and mercy must always
guide our treatment protocols and relational dynamics no matter
who a client might be or how they might be diagnosed.
Second, building on a point made earlier, it is the work of the
Spirit to bring diverse realities and individuals together. This means
that differences among members are not unbridgeable gaps that
ultimately keep members of the body of Christ from entering into
meaningful relationships with one another. Dignity and respect must
be afforded to all people (both inside and outside the church),
whether one has a mental health diagnosis or not. In fact, it is the
Spirit who works to help others come into relationship with those
perceived to be different—the misunderstood or marginalized—and
this includes those struggling with mental illness. This movement of
the Spirit to create a hospitable space for others is also a spiritual
practice. As such, it must be embodied by Christians in order for it to
become a felt reality. Embodying this kind of hospitality begins by
confronting the ways in which we stigmatize others (consciously or
not) whom we perceive as different. The spiritual practice of self-
examination is valuable here. Who do we perceive as being of lesser
value and why? And how might we work to extend honor specifically
to those whom we perceive as different? Here, we must keep in
mind that it is the work of the Spirit that enables us to create spaces
of hospitality within ourselves, confronting our own shadows of
discrimination and disbelief.
Third, while the Spirit helps us stay in contact with or move
toward those whom we perceive as different, the Spirit also helps us
recognize that we have something to learn from people with a
mental health diagnosis. To use Gunton’s terms, this is to recognize
our dynamic interrelatedness. Think back to the story of
schizophrenia described by anthropologist Juli McGruder. It was the
community within which this person was embedded that either
heightened or lessened the stigmatization of such a diagnosis. It’s a
profound example concerning the ways in which the views of a
community can either bring acceptance or rejection to the people
who make up that community—either aiding in their individual and
corporate healing or facilitating further isolation.

-- 183 of 236 --

This work of bringing together humans to be in relationship can be
regarded as one way that the Spirit brings about unity and helps
persons recognize the beauty of difference. While it can often be
painful to embrace (or be embraced by) others who are perceived to
be different, it is the necessary condition for those extending
hospitality and for those receiving hospitality to experience
transformation. Swinton notes that, within the church community,
being hospitable to those with mental illness means that a space is
created so that others in the church community may move toward
understanding the deeper complexity of mental illness as a struggle
that is both disruptive and yet holds potential for being
meaningful.38 If we take hospitality seriously, this means the church
must take time to slow down and listen to these meaningful
experiences of those with mental health issues. Our job is not to
diagnose or reduce the person to some biological health issue that
needs control or cure but to begin to listen and understand mental
health problems “as important aspects of a person’s life story.”39
Embracing those with a mental health diagnosis means that we
must be willing to practice spiritual disciplines like humility, empathy,
and compassion in order to see the humanity of others and move
toward them instead of consciously or unconsciously excluding them
through stigmatizing behaviors. Creating spaces that might ease the
social suffering of those with mental illness should not be thought of
as an end in itself; rather, as Mary Oliver observes in a poem on
prayer, we might think of it as a “doorway into thanks” and a
quietness into which another voice may speak.40
Questions for Reflection and Discussion
1. What has your experience with therapy been? If you have been
shaped by a specific Christian tradition, how does that stream of

-- 184 of 236 --

Christianity approach mental health in general and
psychotherapy in particular?
2. What do you think might happen if churches and religious
leaders put a moratorium on using mental health diagnoses in
the context of Christian community?
3. How does the psychological notion of inheriting destructive
behavioral patterns that operate without our conscious
awareness affect how you think about sin?
4. What have you learned about yourself by studying or working
with persons who have mental health disorders? What else
might they teach the community of faith about God, one
another, or what it means to be human?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
McMinn, Mark R.
Sin and Grace in Christian Counseling: An Integrative
Paradigm. Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2008.
Swinton, John.
Becoming Friends of Time: Disability, Timefullness, and
Gentle Discipleship. Waco: Baylor University Press, 2016.
Watters, Ethan.
Crazy Like Us: The Globalization of the American Psyche.
New York: Free Press, 2011.
1. Brené Brown,
Daring Greatly: How the Courage to Be Vulnerable
Transforms the Way We Live, Love, Parent, and Lead (New York: Avery, 2012),
169.
2. Pete Scazzero,
Emotionally Healthy Spirituality: It’s Impossible to Be
Spiritually Mature While Remaining Emotionally Immature (Grand Rapids:
Zondervan, 2017), 96
.
3. Ethan Watters,
Crazy Like Us: The Globalization of the American Psyche
(New York: Free Press, 2010).
4. Watters,
Crazy Like Us, 127–86
.

-- 185 of 236 --

5. Mark McMinn,
The Science of Virtue: Why Positive Psychology Matters to
the Church (Grand Rapids: Brazos, 2017).
6. Charles Taylor,
Sources of the Self: The Making of Modern Identity (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
7. Karl Menninger,
Man against Himself (New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1938), 393.
8. Joel Green,
Body, Soul, and Human Life: The Nature of Humanity in the
Bible (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2008), 30.
9. “The mind is a relational and embodied process that regulates the flow of
energy and information.” Daniel Siegel,
Mindsight: The New Science of
Personal Transformation (New York: Bantam Books, 2010), 52.
10. Pamela Ebstyne King and William B. Whitney, “What’s the ‘Positive’ in
Positive Psychology? Teleological Considerations Based on Creation and
Imago
Doctrines,”
Journal of Psychology and Theology 43, no. 1 (2015): 47–59.
11. Jürgen Moltmann,
God in Creation: A New Theology of Creation and the
Spirit of God, trans. Margeret Kohl (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1985), 209.
12. David G. Benner,
Care of Souls: Revisioning Christian Nurture and
Counsel (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1998), 69.
13. Calvin famously said, “Nearly all the wisdom we possess, that is to say,
true and sound wisdom, consists of two parts: the knowledge of God and of
ourselves. But, while joined by many bonds, which one precedes and which
brings forth the other is not easy to discern.”
Institutes of the Christian
Religion, ed. John T. McNeill, trans. Ford Lewis Battles (Philadelphia:
Westminster, 1960), 35.
14. Anthony Hoekema,
Created in God’s Image (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans,
1994), 105.
15. Colin E. Gunton,
The Triune Creator: A Historical and Systematic Study
(Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1988), 62.
16. David H. Kelsey,
Eccentric Existence: A Theological Anthropology
(Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2009), 2:1027.
17. Richard Rohr,
Everything Belongs: The Gift of Contemplative Prayer (New
York: Crossroad, 1999), 28.
18. Joel B. Green,
The Gospel of Luke, The New International Commentary
on the New Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997), 212.
19. Colin E. Gunton,
Enlightenment and Alienation: An Essay Towards a
Trinitarian Theology (Eugene, OR: Wipf & Stock, 2006), 103.
20. Gunton,
Enlightenment and Alienation, 103.
21. Froma Walsh holds that “the very essence of the therapeutic relationship
and meaningful change is ultimately spiritual in nature, fostering personal
transformation, wholeness, and relational connection with others.”
Spiritual
Resources in Family Therapy (New York: Guilford, 1999), 3–4.

-- 186 of 236 --

22. Richard E. Butman and Mark Yarhouse, “Psychopathology through the
Eyes of Faith: Integrative Reflections for the Classroom and Beyond,”
Journal
of Psychology and Theology 42, no. 2 (2014): 213.
23. John Swinton, “Time, Hospitality, and Belonging: Towards a Practical
Theology of Mental Health,”
Word & World 35, no. 2 (2015): 171–81.
24. William Whitney, “Beginnings: Why the Doctrine of Creation Matters for
the Integration of Psychology and Christianity,”
Journal of Psychology and
Theology 48, no. 1 (2020): 44–65.
25. Warren S. Brown and Brad D. Strawn,
The Physical Nature of Christian
Life: Neuroscience, Psychology, and the Church (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2012), 168.
26. Steven J. Sandage and Jeannine K. Brown,
Relational Integration of
Psychology and Christian Theology: Theory, Research, and Practice (New York:
Routledge, 2018), 11.
27. Mark R. McMinn,
Sin and Grace in Christian Counseling: An Integrative
Paradigm (Downers Grove, IL: IVP Academic, 2008), 50.
28. Robert D. Stolorow, Bernard Brandchaft, and George E. Atwood,
Psychoanalytic Treatment: An Intersubjective Approach, Psychoanalytic Inquiry
(New York: Routledge, 2004), 7.
29. George E. Atwood and Robert D. Stolorow,
Structures of Subjectivity:
Explorations in Psychoanalytic Phenomenology and Contextualism (New York:
Routledge, 2014), 102.
30. Atwood and Stolorow,
Structures of Subjectivity, 6.
31. Paul Ricoeur,
Oneself as Another (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992), 326.
32. Terry D. Hargrave and Franz Pfitzer,
Restoration Therapy: Understanding
and Guiding Healing in Marriage and Family Therapy (New York: Routledge,
2011).
33. Stolorow, Brandchaft, and Atwood,
Psychoanalytic Treatment, 185.
34. We are indebted to Swinton and his article “Time, Hospitality, and
Belonging” for this point and general direction for this section.
35. Language and the naming of creation matter. The Genesis text speaks to
humanity’s ability to name things, and this naming involves relationship. The
naming of the plants and animals can be seen as a relational task as humanity
enters into a certain kind of relationship with creation. For more on this, see
Walter Brueggemann,
Genesis, Interpretation: A Bible Commentary for
Preaching and Teaching (Atlanta: John Knox, 1982).
36. Swinton, “Time, Hospitality, and Belonging,” 171–81.
37. Swinton, “Time, Hospitality, and Belonging,” 174.
38. Swinton, “Time, Hospitality, and Belonging,” 181.
39. Swinton, “Time, Hospitality, and Belonging,” 178.

-- 187 of 236 --

40. See Mary Oliver’s poem “Praying,” in
Thirst (Boston: Beacon, 2006), 37.

-- 188 of 236 --

7
Psychology as Contextual
Theology
Key takeaways from this chapter:
As a person of Christian faith, to practice psychology is to engage in a
form of contextual theology.
God’s future kingdom informs our present pursuit of justice and
shalom in and through psychology.
For people of Christian faith, hope is not optional.
God’s grace enables other virtues like justice and compassion to be
fully realized.
Those of you who experienced the effects the economic downturn
after the housing market crash in 2008 and the COVID-19 pandemic
of 2020 know firsthand what it is like to see people losing their jobs
and struggling to pay their rent. It may be that some of you couldn’t
find work or knew a friend or family member who lost their job and
had to go on unemployment. If you were watching the news during
2020, most economic experts compared the decline of the economy
in 2020 to the Great Depression in the late 1920s. However, most
experts agree that while the initial decline of the economy in 2020
was sharper than the initial contraction of the economy during the
Great Depression, the Great Depression lasted much longer and had
much more devastating effects. To date, the Great Depression still
stands as the most severe depression that has occurred in the

-- 189 of 236 --

industrialized Western world with crushing declines in employment
that persisted over many years.1
The Great Depression started when the New York Stock Exchange
crashed in 1929, sending Wall Street into a panic and wiping out
billions in investments. Around the worst time of the Depression in
New York, about a third of New York city workers were unemployed,
and homeless encampments called Hoovervilles sprang up around
the city for those who had lost their jobs and homes and were
struggling just to stay alive.2 Dorothy Day, a talented journalist who
converted to Catholicism when she was about thirty, perceived that
the church and government were doing an inadequate job of caring
for the hungry and the homeless in the city. Drawing from the
church’s teaching that Jesus stood in solidarity with and cared for
the poor, Day was committed to inspiring others to do the same.
Using her journalistic skills, she began a newspaper, the
Catholic
Worker, with another social activist and Catholic theologian, Peter
Maurin. Together they began to write about how we should all be
committed to works of mercy and compassion for those who are
immediately around us. This newspaper also highlighted systemic
inequalities in the city and advocated for the poor, eventually
inspiring a wide readership and what was to become known as the
Catholic Worker Movement.
One of the chief outworkings of the movement were houses of
hospitality, which involved people offering up their own houses to
feed and serve the poor. Inspired by Day and Maurin’s vision set
forth in the
Catholic Worker newspaper, these houses of hospitality
were started by ordinary women and men who put the teachings of
Jesus into practical application through works of mercy such as
feeding the hungry, giving drink to the thirsty, and sheltering the
homeless.3 The houses were supported through donations, and
workers volunteered for short or long periods of time. For Day,
everyone had a personal responsibility to help those in need, and
knowing that workers could easily get discouraged by the amount of
need around them, she would remind them that their primary
concern was to be faithful in individual actions by focusing on one

-- 190 of 236 --

person at a time or one act of mercy at a time.4 Just like the boy
who offered up the loaves and fish in the Gospel narratives, Day told
others that all they had to do was to be faithful and give what they
had and that God would take it from there.5 One day, after seeing
the intolerable conditions of one of the makeshift homeless
Hoovervilles and walking through the ankle-deep mud, Day
reminded folks that “Christ is there . . . there in the mud, in the
shacks with His poor.”6 Day’s life and work embodied many of the
key elements that are critical in helping professions like social work
and psychology, but the primary animating principle for her vision
was that human beings—no matter their race, background, or
socioeconomic status—are created in the image of God and are thus
worthy of dignity and respect. Day championed this cause and vision
until her death in 1980.
Contextual Theology, Psychology, and a Vision for
Human Flourishing
Dorothy Day is an inspiring and compelling example of someone
practicing contextual theology. We noted earlier how we all practice
theology from the context that we are embedded in, and we can
never step outside this context, so all theology is, in fact, contextual.
Whether it is our cultural and ethnic background or how we have
been shaped by our studies in psychology, our sociohistorical
location informs the way we see the world and how we live out our
faith in that context. Day’s life and work exemplify a woman who did
just this. She took her skills, talents, and training in journalism and
applied them to the context where she was embedded in New York.
What started as a newspaper that sold for one cent grew into a
movement that cast a vision for helping the poor. Day also embodied
this vision by being with the poor and serving the poor in the
hospitality houses.
However, it wasn’t just Day’s talents in journalism that started this
movement; her faith provided the vision and the underlying
motivation for what she should do. In other words, Day was a

-- 191 of 236 --

contextual theologian; that is, she practiced theology by letting her
faith both inform and speak into her specific situation and context.
With Day’s example in mind, this chapter unfolds in light of four
interrelated claims.
First, practicing theology is always an exercise of letting our faith
inform what we are doing and why we are doing it. Theology isn’t
something that is reserved for those with PhDs in religion or
something that only pastors, ministers, and priests do. Our theology
and faith are motivated and informed by God’s work in our world
and the work of God in our lives. Being a theologian or practicing
theology is simply the application of our own faith and God’s love in
a concrete situation. Theology is a lived practice; as a student of
psychology who is also a person of faith, you will have the
opportunity to let your faith inform the vision of what you do in your
vocation within psychology.
Second, for the contextual theologian, the end informs the
present. God’s vision for humanity is one that has a certain telos—or
end goal of restoration and healing (recall chap. 4). Letting our faith
inform our work means that we are drawn in a certain direction.
Knowing that Christ will draw all things to himself in the end and
that God stands in solidarity with those who suffer gives us
motivation, strength, and hope for the present. This was definitely
true for Dorothy Day. Her vision of Christ’s solidarity with the poor
and the dignity of all humanity kept her grounded in the midst of
enormous suffering. You can also think of this telos as the purpose
or reason for doing what we are doing, which raises an interesting
question, especially for people of Christian faith. What are the
motivations or end goals that compel you to do what you are doing
within your particular subdiscipline of psychology?
Third, just as Day upheld the dignity of human life and worked to
cultivate shalom in the context she inhabited, you too will have an
opportunity to allow the vision of God’s love to bring wholeness and
healing to the world in the context where you find yourself within
the discipline of psychology. The underlying motivation and the end
goal of the work we do should be centered around a desire to join
the work of God to bring flourishing and shalom to our sphere of

-- 192 of 236 --

influence. Given the unique features of psychology, and that most
social scientists are also on a quest for the improvement of human
life, the theological notions of flourishing and shalom fit nicely within
the psychological project, and in some cases provide it with a
legitimacy it otherwise doesn’t possess. The Christian confession of
Christ as Lord moves us beyond the walls of the church to reflect
and imagine how Christ’s work would make a difference for the
society, culture, and neighborhoods in which we live and move and
have our being.
Fourth, Day’s life and ministry highlight the importance of certain
Christian virtues in the specific work she was doing. Day’s vision was
inspired by Christian compassion, hospitality, and mercy. There will,
of course, be certain theological virtues that inform our action (i.e.,
ethics) regardless of the situation in which we find ourselves.
However, within the realm of psychology, there are a few theological
virtues that can and should inform our work in particular: justice,
love, hope, grace, and hospitality. By reflecting on these virtues, we
are able to see how they can inform and enhance our work in
psychology and give shape to the various contexts in which we have
been placed.
Much of this book has focused on clarifying and expounding the
underlying theological motivations for operating within one or more
of the various psychological subdisciplines. We have gone so far as
to suggest that God’s work in the world can be carried out through
human involvement in clinical and research psychology, and that
God’s Spirit enables us to participate as co-laborers in God’s creative
work, thus allowing us to contribute to the wholeness and healing of
individuals and communities through research or clinical work—or
both. In the previous chapters we’ve demonstrated how, as
Christians, psychological scientific research is always interpreted
from a larger theological framework that is informed by our faith,
culture, experience, and background. For the remainder of this
chapter, we demonstrate how justice, love, hope, grace, and
hospitality have the potential to serve as an ethical framework that
can guide the ways in which psychological practitioners who are also

-- 193 of 236 --

Christ-followers respond to the specific contexts in which they are
embedded.
Justice
For Christians, the biblical idea of justice is rooted in a God who is
just and a God who stands against human sin and human
oppression. Just as the theme of God’s love runs throughout
Scripture (insofar as God remains faithfully committed to creation
and to humanity), so does the theme of justice. Not only does God
consistently stand against those things that destroy humanity, but
God also desires the human community to be an example of God’s
mercy and love.
The two Hebrew words that biblical authors most commonly use
to describe the idea of justice in the Hebrew Scriptures are
mispat
and
sedaqah. These words often occur together as a pair in the Old
Testament prophetic books and are commonly translated as “justice”
and “righteousness.”7 According to Old Testament scholar and
theologian Walter Brueggemann, when the prophets called for
justice and righteousness they were referring to an order in human
society that is viable and sustainable—one in which neighbors can
dwell in solidarity with one another.8 In the New Testament, God’s
justice is embodied in Jesus Christ, who expresses care for those
who are marginalized and on the outskirts of society. Luke 4 (as
we’ve already noted) is a proclamation of God’s justice on earth.
Jesus is the harbinger of justice through his provision of bodily
restoration, proclaiming freedom for those imprisoned and offering
freedom to those who are oppressed. Remember from chapter 4
that there are both proximate and ultimate areas of existence. God’s
justice addresses both areas. In the proximate areas, God stands
with those who are marginalized and calls us to dismantle unjust
systems that cause oppression, and in the ultimate areas, God
assures us that justice will be administered in the end when all
humanity stands before God.

-- 194 of 236 --

It is important to point out that each of these biblical concepts
(whether it be the poor and oppressed, or righteousness and
restoration) is describing a concrete reality, and justice is no
exception. Notice that God’s justice always moves toward action,
whether it is through the prophets or Jesus. Just like love, there is
an action-oriented element to justice. God’s justice flows from God’s
love and desire for righteousness. And most importantly for our work
here, there is always an element of human agency involved, as God
desires humans to live out and practice justice in their lives at both
the individual and communal levels. Ultimately, we cannot just talk
about justice but must act in ways that promote and uphold justice
in the areas where we have influence.
Consequently, as Christians working in the field of psychology, our
work should be informed by the Christian faith’s understanding of
justice as an act of loving solidarity that addresses the material
concerns of those who have been marginalized or oppressed. In
order to be truly loving, we not only have to call evil what it is but
we must also use our position to help elevate the dignity of those
who suffer. This kind of justice can take many forms in research and
psychotherapy, but at the very least it involves acting in ways that
are within the bounds of ethical and legal guidelines. It’s hard to
imagine us advocating for justice without at least starting from an
ethical place that licensing boards and standards of practice require.
But, of course, the hope is that we will move well beyond the bare
minimum. From our perspective, ethical practices within psychology
that are informed by a Christian understanding of justice can take
three forms: (1) advocating for justice, (2) understanding the
injustices experienced by marginalized groups or individuals in
research or clinical work, and (3) working to eradicate injustices in
organizations and in the lives of individuals.
As indicated in the previous chapter, we must also understand that
certain groups have experienced the trauma of injustice more than
other groups, which means that justice-oriented work is often
corrective. Black, Brown, Indigenous groups, and other persons of
color have experienced both systemic oppression and
intergenerational trauma from injustices. Women and LGBTQ

-- 195 of 236 --

individuals are also not strangers to injustices, discrimination, and
trauma. As Christians, we cannot be naive about these dynamics,
especially as it concerns the extreme vulnerability of those who
embody the intersection of multiple marginalized identities. White
researchers and psychotherapists in particular must do their own
work to understand these dynamics in order to advocate for and
work toward eradicating injustices for marginalized groups. We also
must do our due diligence practicing incarnational psychology by
being with others—not in the form of solving or advice-giving but by
listening, being humble, and sitting with others in pain. For those
who identify as White, the work of justice also means that we
examine and become familiar with our privileges and how we live in
a system that has granted an easier time for those who are White
than for persons of color (and the same can also be said for those
who identify as heterosexual, cisgendered men in comparison to
others).
Injustices can occur on a systemic level (among groups), relational
level (between persons), intrapsychic level (within individuals), or
incorporate elements from all three of these levels simultaneously.
Disparity in the allocation of resources is a frequent injustice that
occurs with respect to marginalized groups and would be an
example of systemic injustice. Advocating for justice in this realm
might mean dedicating a portion of your therapy practice, time, or
research to eradicating this form of injustice. It could be as simple as
allocating some of your time in clinical practice to seeing clients at a
low fee or no fee. Or, within research, it could mean dedicating a
portion of your research to understanding more about and working
to correct some of these health disparities.
On an individual and intrapsychic level, psychotherapists
frequently encounter injustices in how people view themselves, or
hear about injustices that have occurred between persons.
Psychotherapy is a unique place where we can point out these
injustices and can also work to equip people to address injustices
within their own lives. For example, some people might be unaware
of the violence they express to themselves in their own self-talk, and
eradicating injustice on this personal level might look something like

-- 196 of 236 --

providing alternative ways of thinking about themselves and offering
a different narrative stressing self-worth instead of dismissiveness or
shame. At the end of the day, the specific ways in which each of us
responds to these injustices will depend on the unique demands of
our individual contexts, but the common thread that unites all our
efforts is a shared commitment to God’s compassionate care for the
marginalized and oppressed.
Love
The English word for “love” has a broad range of meanings. We use
the same word (“love”) to describe all manner of relationships, from
things that we really like, to causes or people that we would
dedicate ourselves to or even die for. We say we love a new Netflix
show, or love our lover, or love our dog, or love our mother. In
reality, each of these uses of the word “love” actually means
something slightly different, depending on what or whom our love is
directed toward. If I (William) told you “I absolutely
love Ben and
Jerry’s half-baked cookie dough ice cream,” you know I just mean
that I really, really like it. You probably know that I wouldn’t sacrifice
my life for a pint of Ben and Jerry’s or put my son’s life on the line
for some Ben and Jerry’s. (Though I do think my wife might put
my
life on the line for some Ben and Jerry’s—we’re still working through
that in therapy.) Even though we use the word “love” to describe our
enjoyment of inanimate objects, we also use the same English word
to describe the relational love that connects us to other people and
to God. Thus, when we use the word “love” in this relational sense,
we are often using it to describe a deep commitment, care, and
respect for our family, a spouse, or a romantic partner.
In contrast, the Hebrew word for love carries a rich meaning.
Hesed describes a deep steadfast love that remains committed no
matter what. It’s a love that is self-sacrificing and oriented toward
others. For instance, as expressed in Jeremiah 31:3, God’s love is
steadfast, long-lasting, and committed to seeing Israel flourish and
thrive: “I have loved you with an everlasting love; I have drawn you
with unfailing kindness” (NIV). From a theological perspective,

-- 197 of 236 --

justice and love go hand in hand. God is against those things that
destroy humanity and human dignity (the theological foundations for
justice) because of God’s deep and steadfast love for the world God
created. In the New Testament, we are reminded that, first and
foremost, God is love (1 John 4:8) and that love is the “greatest” of
Christian virtues, rising above both faith and hope (1 Cor. 13:13).
Agape is the Greek word that best captures this form of self-
sacrificing and unconditional love. In 1 Corinthians 13, Paul reminds
us that love never fails. Moreover, the first and greatest
commandment as paraphrased by Jesus is to love God, and the
second greatest commandment is to love our neighbor as ourselves
(Matt. 22:36–40). The commandment to love our neighbor as ourself
brings us back to our discussion in chapter 4, where we suggested
that self-love is intimately bound up with our ability to love others.
If you’ve had some exposure to Christianity, then the notion that
“God is love” is an idea with which you are likely already familiar.
Although the theological basis for love is found in God’s own self,
love is action oriented. God moved to create the world out of love
and remains committed to humanity and that world. Moreover, the
movement of God’s love extends to human love so that we are called
to act in a loving way toward our neighbor. We know from
attachment theory in psychology that lives devoid of a solid, loving
attachment figure early in life may struggle later to form deep and
lasting relationships. Love remains the bond that binds us to God
and binds us to one another as a human community. And, as difficult
as it may seem, the radical claim of Jesus is that love is to be
extended not only toward those whom we know and like but also
toward our enemies (Matt. 5:42–43).
When viewed from this perspective, it may very well be that our
work in psychotherapy and psychological research is best understood
as an act of love. Operating with an ethic of love shapes our
purposes and motivations as practitioners of psychology. In addition,
it directs and guides the way we relate to others. Being motivated by
God’s love helps ground us when we work with clients who have
difficult presenting issues or when we encounter challenges in our
own families. Love helps us remember that when people express

-- 198 of 236 --

anger, fear, or frustration, our primary task is to empathize with
them and extend grace to them.
Psychotherapists often act as an embodied (and incarnated) form
of love for clients or patients, and through their creation of
hospitable spaces healing can and does occur. When we consider
that we have the ability to shape and tend to the created realm, we
also see that our work within psychology is a way to nurture other
people. Relationships that have been neglected or shaped by hatred,
violence, and greed lead to the diminishment rather than the
enhancement of human personhood. Conversely, relationships that
are carefully nurtured through love over time have the potential to
thrive. Indeed, the sheer resilience of the human person is a
testament to the restorative effects of this kind of relational love.
Hope
Hope is a robust concept within the Christian tradition, one that
carries with it numerous ramifications for anyone working in
psychology from the perspective of faith. Echoing Paul’s discussion of
the Christian virtues of “faith, hope, and love” in 1 Corinthians 13,
Thomas Aquinas, the premier theologian of the Roman Catholic
Church, regarded hope as a theological virtue (along with faith and
love). Aquinas noted that hope is different from human optimism
since it relies on a future that is established by God.9 Christian hope
pursues good even though it might be hard to find, in large part
because it is activated and animated by the self-giving love of God
and the grace of Christ.10 Following this line of thought, Jürgen
Moltmann’s landmark work,
Theology of Hope, moved eschatology
(the study of the last things and the future life with God) and hope
to the center of twentieth-century theological discourse. For
Moltmann, hope is the power of the future reality of God’s new
kingdom: a future life with God that bears upon our present reality.11
Though we might not always see it, the world is being drawn toward
this new reality, which was established through the death and
resurrection of Christ. For Moltmann, knowing that our future reality

-- 199 of 236 --

is established by God is the foundational element of hope, and it is
on the basis of this eschatological hope that we pursue justice and
righteousness in the here and now.12
With theologians like Aquinas, and even Moltmann, hope is
conceptualized differently than it is in positive psychology. Although
positive psychology’s theoretical and empirical explorations provide
us with helpful insights regarding the underlying psychological
processes of hope, in the psychology literature hope is grounded in
human action, not God’s action. Moreover, research on hope in
positive psychology is goal-oriented, but it posits human volition
alone as the ultimate motivation for moving the self toward a desired
goal. This operative assumption leads psychologists Kevin Rand and
Kaitlin Touza to define hope as the ability to produce “pathways to
achieve desired goals and to motivate oneself to use those
pathways.”13 Again, there is much to learn from these psychological
and anthropocentric descriptions of hope, but both Aquinas and
Moltmann underscore the transcendent character of hope as being
grounded in God’s action to save, redeem, and restore. God is
ultimately the one who assures the future kingdom of peace will
come about. Or, as Mark McMinn puts it, hope connects persons with
the purposes of God that extend beyond the self.14
The Christian virtue of hope pursues the good because we trust
and know that, ultimately, God leads and guides us in the present
and assures a future reality of restoration established through the
death and resurrection of Christ. God not only loves both human and
nonhuman creation in an ultimate sense but also desires for
restoration and wholeness to come about in part in this present life.
Christian hope is therefore not a futile or empty optimism, nor is it a
naive refusal to acknowledge the suffering and pain that is present
in the world. This kind of hard-won hope matters a great deal for the
work we do in psychology because it enables us to stay grounded
when we encounter human suffering rather than retreating from it or
spiritualizing it away. It is for this very reason that Lisa Cahill
proposes in
Global Justice, Christology and Christian Ethics that hope
cannot exist without justice. Hope is nurtured when justice is done,

-- 200 of 236 --

and our active work to bring about justice draws us closer to God
and, in turn, nurtures hope.15
Consequently, Christian hope helps psychological practitioners
encounter suffering and pursue justice without being completely
consumed by it. There will be times in your work in psychology when
you encounter human suffering. As psychotherapists, researchers,
and professors, we encounter some degree of human suffering on
almost a daily basis, and sometimes we must hold on to hope for
clients or colleagues or students who haven’t the capacity to hope,
just as we need people to hold on to hope for us when we’re in
moments of despair or sadness. It is in those moments when we
encounter human suffering that a fully orbed Christian hope allows
us (as either a psychotherapist or researcher) to sit in the midst of
suffering and to stay present with someone else. Hope allows us to
seek the good and act justly. And for the person of Christian faith,
this is not optional. Indeed, as Zechariah 9:12 reminds us, we are
“prisoners of hope” (NIV).
Grace
While the word “grace” is used in everyday conversation to denote
an extension of goodwill between persons (e.g., a grace period, or
extending grace to someone), the Christian concept of grace has
broad and rich contours that are rooted in the triune God’s
relationship with creation and the human creature. Within Scripture,
grace can be understood as unmerited divine favor—the gift of a
benevolent and loving God. Jesus is the one on whom God’s grace
resides (Luke 2:40), and Jesus is also the one who gives grace to
others through his life, death, and resurrection (John 1:16).
We have addressed some of the types and qualities of grace in
previous chapters. There is a common grace that God bestows on all
of creation, indicating that God gives good things to all people even
though they might not acknowledge God. Grace is also at the heart
of salvation and restoration, the only means by which humans can
be rescued from their sinful condition and brought into communion

-- 201 of 236 --

with God. It is also important to remember that if God was acting
completely justly, no human would be able to be in communion with
God. So it is God’s grace that makes it possible for a relationship
with the Creator to exist in the first place, and it is in and through
Jesus Christ that God’s grace and love have been freely given to us
(Rom. 3:24; 5:8).
Theologians have hotly debated the mechanics by which grace is
bestowed on the human person (is it imputed or infused?) and have
also arrived at different conclusions regarding how grace works in a
person’s life before someone comes to acknowledge Christ (see
chap. 2 on prevenient grace). Entering into these centuries-long
conversations is part of doing theology, but we haven’t the space to
fully unpack them here. In our estimation, the most important point
to remember is that we are undeserving of God’s grace, and yet it is
freely given to us by God. Every breath of air that we take, every
moment of goodness that we encounter in our day, our week, our
life, indeed, our very existence, are possible only because we live in
a state of being changed and transformed in light of the reality of
God’s grace.
As constructive theologians, we have both inherited our
theological sensibilities from the Protestant tradition of Christianity.
In addition to this, I (William) find Eastern Orthodox notions of grace
quite compelling. The Eastern Orthodox Church has historically
understood grace as the energy that flows forth from the persons of
the Trinity, which has a transformative effect on everything that it
encounters.16 Grace is the energy of God that draws us into God’s
life, enables us to participate in the life of God, and brings about
life.17 Some Orthodox theologians compare grace to the rays of the
sun that both warm and change anything they encounter.
The recognition that we have received these transformative rays of
life-giving energy from God leaves us with little other choice than to
respond with gratitude for what has been received.18 And it is this
seemingly inexorable move toward thanksgiving that has immediate
implications for our work and actions within psychology. Just as the
light of the sun shining on a garden enables all kinds of plants and

-- 202 of 236 --

other things to grow, the energy of God’s grace helps cultivate or
“grow” other virtues or strengths. As McMinn rightly notes, when we
extend kindness to others, some might call this grace, but this
kindness or goodness is still qualitatively different from God’s grace
as it is given to us.19 Even though, as humans, we do not dole out
God’s grace, we can understand grace as being the energy that
enables other strengths like kindness, goodness, mercy, and
compassion to be cultivated in our own life. God’s grace helps us
make space for others and enables us to cultivate other virtues like
empathy, compassion, and gratitude as we work with clients in
psychotherapy.
We can also understand God’s grace as being present in how we
go about study and research, creating an environment that allows us
to foster self-acceptance and self-compassion.20 By allowing
ourselves to be mindfully aware of the divine grace that is freely
given to us, we are able to create transformative spaces that provide
opportunities for us to understand and accept the strengths and
shortcomings of ourselves and others.21 As we become more aware
of God’s grace, we are able to practice compassion for others and for
ourselves. Again, God’s grace is the energy or life force that enables
other virtues like compassion (for self and others) to grow. And as
Kristen Neff notes, self-compassion involves a kindness toward
ourselves, a remembrance of being part of a common or shared
humanity where we all have imperfections, and being mindful of
painful thoughts and feelings without overidentifying with them.22
Grace is a vital ingredient not only for the work we do with others
but also for the work we do with ourselves.
Hospitality
Throughout the history of the Christian church, the practice of
hospitality, or welcoming the stranger, has been regarded as an
extension of God’s grace to others.23 In this way, it is appropriate to
talk about hospitality after we have discussed grace. For instance, in

-- 203 of 236 --

Untamed Hospitality: Welcoming God and Other Strangers,
theologian Elizabeth Newman writes about the connection between
grace and hospitality: “Our lives are always gifts of God; the divine
spring continually supplies what we need. There is never a time
when we can sit back and say, ‘Ahh, now my life is mine.’ Such a
way of thinking distorts not only our lives but more fundamentally
the nature of God, whose superabundant giving never ceases
because it lies at the heart of God’s triune identity.”24 Here, Newman
helpfully points out that the ability for us to give to others and to
strangers is because God’s grace never stops being given to us.
The roots of the Christian practice of hospitality come from the
Hebrew Scriptures and draw from Israel’s experience of being
enslaved by the Egyptians. Exodus 23:9 states that the stranger
should not be oppressed because “you [Israel] know the heart of a
stranger, for you were strangers in the land of Egypt” (RSV). A
similar command is repeated in Deuteronomy 10:19: “Love the
sojourner therefore; for you were sojourners in the land of Egypt”
(RSV). These commandments inspire the teachings found in
Matthew 25:35 where Jesus reminds us that welcoming the stranger
by providing food, drink, or clothes is the same as welcoming him.
What is often missed in this text is how Jesus elevates the worth and
dignity of those who are on the margins. Jesus specifically mentions
those who are in prison, those who are sick, those who do not have
food, drink, or clothes, and those who are otherwise outsiders
(strangers). These people too, says Jesus, are sacred in the eyes of
God, and are worthy of being welcomed and provided for. Paul
continues a similar line of reasoning in Romans 12 by encouraging
the Christians in the Roman church to “practice hospitality” (Rom.
12:13 RSV), indicating that even our enemies should be given food
and drink in this radical practice of overcoming evil with good (Rom.
12:20).
Darrell Guder, in his book
Missional Church, describes the Christian
practice of hospitality as the way we as humans participate in God’s
“peaceable kingdom.” Guder notes, “Such hospitality indicates the
crossing of boundaries (ethnic origin, economic condition, political

-- 204 of 236 --

orientation, gender status, social experience, educational
background) by being open and welcoming of the other. Without
such communities of hospitality, the world will have no way of
knowing that all God’s creation is meant to live in peace.”25
Hospitality comes to bear on our actions as Christians and
psychologists when we consider the act of welcoming those on the
margins as a means for pursuing justice. Hospitality is a way to
peaceably “host” those who feel like outsiders because of their race,
mental status, sexual orientation, or economic status. In my work as
a therapist, I (William) see time and time again how clients bring
parts of themselves out into the open, hoping that these parts will
be welcomed and seen, that is, granted hospitality. When we have
experiences in life in which we are clearly not welcome and are
instead shamed because of who we are, the result is that we begin
to hide these parts of ourselves. However, hiding merely prevents us
from bringing these aspects of ourselves out into the open so that
we might understand them. We need to be around others who are
able to graciously and hospitably hold these parts of ourselves
because we cannot begin to change what we cannot see or
understand. Psychotherapy offers such a hospitable space for exactly
this kind of change to begin: a space where we might take those
first steps toward being and becoming whole.
From Hospitality to Wholeness
In the contemporary, largely capitalist context, hospitality is often
seen in purely transactional terms. It’s either a “service” that comes
with the purchase of some other commodity (like a hotel’s concierge
service), or the name for an entire industry of for-profit businesses
ranging anywhere from restaurants and hotels to amusement parks
and casinos. This service-oriented notion does make some sense
given that the English word “hospitality” is drawn from the Latin
adjective
hospitalis, meaning “of a guest.” Interestingly, the Latin
root for this word (
hospes) is also where we get the English words
“hospital,” “hostel,” “hotel,” and “host.” All these words indicate a

-- 205 of 236 --

sense of being open to those who are in need of a place to stay or
looking for help. But it is also the case that
hospes is formed from
the word
hostis, which means “stranger” or “enemy.” It’s where we
derive English words like “hostile” and “hostage.” So hospitality
cannot be simply about opening up a space where friends and other
like-minded folks gather—people who we know will reciprocate
either in the form of some kind of currency or by returning the favor
at a later time. Rather, hospitality in the thick sense—the Christian
sense–—is about opening up our most intimate of spaces to those
we know full well might never repay us or, worse yet, might seek to
do us harm.
Jesus continually reminded his listeners that anyone can extend
love and compassion to those who already love us (Matt. 5:43–48).
But the kingdom that Jesus was sent to proclaim demands
something of us that is far more radical: loving our enemies. It’s one
thing to demonstrate grace and hospitality to those we expect will
treat us with an equal measure of kindness and respect. It’s
something else altogether to take that same risk of hospitality
without any such assurances. This is not to say that clinical
psychologists who are people of Christian faith should be reckless
with respect to the clients they serve or take unnecessary risks that
might put themselves or others in harm’s way. Some level of risk is,
of course, always involved when working with human beings, but
Jesus isn’t implying that we should entirely abandon wisdom and
discernment. Rather, Jesus is suggesting that hospitality necessarily
involves some level of disruption and discomfort on the part of the
host.
Hospitality is not about making ourselves and others comfortable;
it’s about allowing others to change us. It’s about moving toward a
form of wholeness that is deeply relational, which means that it is
nothing if not a messy and risk-filled endeavor. It isn’t simply about
the restoration and well-being of others (although that’s a big part of
it); it’s about the transformation of our own selves and the broader
niche we inhabit along with a diverse community of others who are
both like and unlike us. Indeed, there is a real risk in showing
genuine hospitality. The host might encounter another human being

-- 206 of 236 --

in all their brokenness and all their difference and, as a result, be
forever changed. Quite understandably, it’s a risk not everyone is
willing to take. But for those who are willing, of one thing we are
certain: they will never be the same, and neither will the people
whom they serve.
Questions for Reflection and Discussion
1. How might the concept of grace inform the work you envision
doing in psychology?
2. Are there any limits to the hospitality that therapists should
demonstrate toward their clients? If so, what might those limits
be?
3. How would you describe the specific context in which you are
called to provide mental health services? What are some of the
challenges this context presents?
4. In practical terms, what does it mean for a clinical psychologist
to hope on behalf of those who have lost the ability to do so?
Resources for Reading and Exploration
Cahill, Lisa Sowle.
Global Justice, Christology and Christian Ethics. New
Studies in Christian Ethics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
McMinn, Mark R.
The Science of Virtue: Why Positive Psychology Matters to
the Church. Grand Rapids: Brazos, 2017.
Newman, Elizabeth.
Untamed Hospitality: Welcoming God and Other
Strangers. The Christian Practice of Everyday Life. Grand Rapids: Brazos,
2007.

-- 207 of 236 --

1. David C. Wheelock, “Comparing the COVID-19 Recession with the Great
Depression,”
Economic Synopses 29, 2020,
https://doi.org/10.20955/es.2020.39.
2. Hoovervilles got their name from those who blamed President Herbert
Hoover for the economic downturn that occurred during the Great Depression.
See Pauline Toole, “Unemployment in the Great Depression,” NYC Department
of Records and Information Services, October 9, 2020,
https://www.archives.nyc/blog/2020/10/9/9ovdpgn8lc5zxcild0ooltvzmfwx22.
3. Coleman Fannin, “Dorothy Day’s Radical Hospitality,” in
Hospitality:
Christian Reflection, ed. Robert B. Kruschwitz (Waco: Baylor University Press,
2007), 37–45.
4. Fannin, “Dorothy Day’s Radical Hospitality,” in
Hospitality, 42.
5. Dorothy Day, “Aims and Purposes,”
Catholic Worker, February 1940, 7.
6. Dorothy Day, “Hooverville,”
Catholic Worker, May 1940, 5.
7. Walter Brueggemann,
God, Neighbor, Empire: The Excess of Divine
Fidelity and the Command of Common Good (Waco: Baylor University Press,
2016), 12.
8. Brueggemann,
God, Neighbor, Empire, 13, 40.
9. Thomas Aquinas,
Summa Theologica, II-II.17–22.
10. Douglas Meeks, “Hope,” in
The Cambridge Dictionary of Christian
Theology, ed. Ian A. McFarland, David A. S. Fergusson, Karen Kilby, and Iain
R. Torrance (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 225–26.
11. Jürgen Moltmann,
Theology of Hope: On the Ground and the
Implications of a Christian Eschatology (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1993), 91.
12. Richard Bauckham,
The Theology of Jürgen Moltmann (New York: T&T
Clark, 1995), 39.
13. Kevin L. Rand and Kaitlin K. Touza, “Hope Theory,” in
The Oxford
Handbook of Positive Psychology, ed. C. R. Snyder, S. J. Lopez, L. M. Edwards,
and S. C. Marques, 3rd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 425.
14. Mark R. McMinn,
The Science of Virtue: Why Positive Psychology Matters
to the Church (Grand Rapids: Brazos, 2017), 5–6.
15. Lisa Sowle Cahill,
Global Justice, Christology and Christian Ethics, New
Studies in Christian Ethics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 6.
16. Vladimir Lossky,
The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church
(Cambridge: Lutterworth Press, 1957), 75–86.
17. Wolfhart Pannenberg,
Systematic Theology, trans. G. W. Bromiley (Grand
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1997), 3:197–98.
18. Robert A. Emmons, Peter C. Hill, Justin L. Barrett, and Kelly M. Kapic,
“Psychological and Theological Reflections on Grace and Its Relevance for
Science and Practice,”
Psychology of Religion and Spirituality 9, no. 3 (2017):
276–84.

-- 208 of 236 --

19. McMinn,
The Science of Virtue, 147–48.
20. Emmons et al., “Psychological and Theological Reflections,” 280.
21. Emmons et al., “Psychological and Theological Reflections,” 280.
22. Kristen Neff, “Self-Compassion: An Alternative Conceptualization of a
Healthy Attitude Toward Oneself,”
Self and Identity 2, no. 2 (2003): 85–101.
23. Donald K. McKim, “Hospitality,” in
The Westminster Dictionary of
Theological Terms, 2nd ed. (Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2014).
24. Elizabeth Newman,
Untamed Hospitality: Welcoming God and Other
Strangers, The Christian Practice of Everyday Life (Grand Rapids: Brazos,
2007), 170.
25. Darrell L. Guder, ed.,
Missional Church: A Vision for the Sending of the
Church in North America, The Gospel and Our Culture (Grand Rapids:
Eerdmans, 1998), 5–6.

-- 209 of 236 --

Conclusion
What is the kingdom of God like? To what should I compare it? It is
like a mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his garden. It grew
and became a tree, and the wild birds nested in its branches.
—Luke 13:18–19
Not too long ago, I (Kutter) visited Apricot Lane, a farm just outside
of Los Angeles County started in 2011 by Molly and John Chester. At
the end of the guided tour, which featured a farm-to-table lunch, I
realized that I had just experienced something wildly subversive. It
wasn’t simply that John and Molly’s approach to regenerative
farming embodied a critique of the large-scale monoculture that
characterizes modern industrial agriculture. Rather, like an
unassuming little seed lying dormant under an otherwise lifeless
landscape, the subversion was planted much deeper, hidden beneath
the soil.
Of course, at first blush, you wouldn’t know it. Apricot Lane is
nothing short of an endearing homage to all that’s right with rural
life. What’s more, it’s super cute. From the meticulously manicured
garden to the expertly designed orchards and newborn lambs
trampling the ground beneath the lemon trees, it’s something
straight out of a
Chic & Country magazine spread. But follow Molly
and John behind the doors of the farm’s fertility center and a whole
new world of soil and worms and micro-organisms unfolds.
Suddenly, the former private chef (Molly) and documentary
filmmaker (John) are no longer a couple who simply chose to leave
the city behind for a more whimsical and less hurried life in the
country. Rather, they are evangelists preaching the gospel of
regenerative soil, biomimicry, nutrient-dense foods, and, above all
else, ecological interconnectedness. Oh, and as they hold aloft
handfuls of microbe-rich soil from their vermicomposting bins, it

-- 210 of 236 --

becomes clear that they also have a deep and abiding passion for
worm poop.
Every nook and cranny of Apricot Lane embodies John and Molly’s
undying commitment to the health of the soil and, by extension, the
vitality of the earth as a whole. But something else is going on just
beneath the surface. If you stop, look, and listen long enough, you
just might catch a glimpse of it. For instance, when my nine-year-old
daughter asked John how to tell the difference between a plant and
a weed, he offered up a piece of wisdom borne from the intimate
relationship he had cultivated with the land over the preceding eight
years of trial and travail: “There really is no such thing as a ‘weed.’
That’s just a name some people give to plants that are growing
where they don’t want them to grow. But whatever you call them,
they’re a sign of an imbalance in the land, and they invite us to a
deeper form of collaboration with the land.”
It’s a piece of wisdom that is profoundly simple but, at the very
same time, world-shattering. Indeed, although John and Molly don’t
profess any kind of Christian faith, the lived wisdom they have
stumbled on by simply observing the structure and workings of the
created order is strikingly similar to the sage advice that was spoken
long ago by a teacher who was also quite fond of pastoral
metaphors: Jesus.
The suggestion that two people who do not profess to be
followers of Jesus could tap into the same stream of wisdom as
Jesus might come as a bit of a surprise for some, but not for readers
of this book. After all, Jesus himself rooted his life and teachings in
the Hebrew wisdom tradition—a way of life grounded in careful
observation of the created order. From Jesus’s perspective, to pursue
wisdom was to pursue that which had been present since the dawn
of creation (Prov. 8:22) and was woven into the fabric of the natural
order (Prov. 3:19). It was readily available to anyone who had the
eyes to see it. Like farmers (both ancient and modern), artists,
philosophers, and psychological scientists, Jesus was able to come to
a deeper and more abiding understanding of God by examining the
created order.

-- 211 of 236 --

But Jesus didn’t simply regurgitate the wisdom he inherited; he
got creative with it. He told parables—world-changing, paradigm-
shattering, topsy-turvy stories about the kingdom of God. Imagine
that. Jesus was the fullest manifestation of God’s revelatory
presence in human history, and of all the ways he could have
communicated with us about the coming kingdom, he chose to tell
stories—stories about seeds, and birds, and trees, and unplowed
fields, and baking bread. In other words, Jesus told stories about the
everyday, mundane elements of pastoral life. His parables focused
on farming and cooking and dealing with livestock, but they always
had a twist that reoriented (or perhaps disoriented) his listeners. In
these stories, extravagant parties are thrown for foolish and
ungrateful sons. Entire flocks are abandoned to find a single
wayward sheep. Wedding guests who fail to RSVP are uninvited to
make room for the outcasts living on the margins of society. And
mustard seeds are planted, growing into trees in which birds are
able to nest.
When it comes to how the hard-won wisdom of a regenerative
farmer relates to clinical and research psychology, the mustard seed
parable is particularly illuminating, but not for the reasons one might
imagine. Jesus’s listeners, connected as they were to the land, would
have immediately caught the scandalous nature of his parable. In
the first place, they would have known that mustard plants don’t
grow large enough to support birds, so at the very least, Jesus’s
parable would have been understood as a rhetorical exaggeration, a
way of highlighting the extravagant nature of the kingdom.
Perhaps even more important, though, mustard plants were also
incredibly fast-growing and could take over a field in a brief period of
time. In other words, they were weeds. Or at least that’s the name
they were given by those who sought to control the land and
dominate it by forcing it to produce only one kind of crop. The
consequences of such a label are far reaching and dire,
fundamentally shifting the relationships between the land, the plant,
and the farmer. Indeed, by diagnosing a broader ecological problem
as entirely the fault of an individual plant, and then giving that

-- 212 of 236 --

diagnosis a name (i.e., a “weed”), the farmer is left with almost no
other choice but to rip it out and kill it.
But as I learned from Molly and John while traveling with them
through the biodynamic orchards of Apricot Lane Farms, there really
is no such thing as a weed—at least not when the farmer’s aim is to
collaborate with the land so that it yields life rather than coerce the
land into the production of goods. There are, of course, certain
plants that run the risk of choking out others in the garden, but
that’s not because they are “weeds.” That’s because the land itself is
crying out. When a particular plant has run amok, it is both a sign
and symptom of a deeper and more pervasive imbalance in the
ecosystem.
Odds are at least part of the reason you decided to study
psychology and consider a career as a clinical psychologist or
psychological scientist is because you recognized at some point in
your life that things are not the way they should be and that it
doesn’t have to be this way (because it hasn’t always been this
way). It’s also likely that, whether you were originally prompted by a
sense of disjointedness in your own lived experience or by the voice
of the land and its inhabitants crying out, you are now at a place
where you desire to help address the mental, emotional, and
behavioral imbalances that seem to plague so much of contemporary
life. Given the pervasiveness of these psychological imbalances, we
have talked at great length about the ways in which a constructive
theology might aid students of psychology in their efforts to cultivate
for themselves and others a space in which they might flourish.
Indeed, because theology and psychology have so much to say
about what is broken, pathological, and in need of healing, we
intentionally focused much of our discussion on the ultimate ends to
which both aim, a telos marked by God’s life-giving presence.
It does no one any good to pretend the vision of wholeness and
shalom that the Christian theological tradition articulates has been
fully realized in the here and now, especially given the level, depth,
and expanse of human suffering that has come to define reality for
many people who are forced to navigate the various economic
uncertainties, personal catastrophes, and global crises of the

-- 213 of 236 --

contemporary social order. God’s redemptive project in the world is
“already but not yet,” and it is in the “not yet” that we most
assuredly live. Creation groans as if in childbirth (Rom. 8:22)
because it is not yet free of its bondage to decay and death, the
defeat of which Christ began when God raised him from the dead
but which will not be brought to completion until the day when God
is all in all (1 Cor. 15:24–28).
Put a bit differently, theology and psychology share a common
starting point: the catastrophic. We always begin in the chaos and
crises and traumas of the world as it has been handed to us. Neither
psychology nor theology can explain human suffering any more than
they can explain it away. But it is always there, constituting the
conditions of our existence, even when we are not consciously aware
of its presence. We cannot ignore it or sublimate it or spiritualize it;
we have no other choice but to reckon with it. Case in point: we
have written almost the entirety of this book in the midst of a
fourteen-month-long lockdown in Southern California due to a global
pandemic that, at the time of this writing, has killed over half a
million American citizens. During this same period of time, our region
of the world also suffered historic wildfires that destroyed countless
homes and displaced numerous families, including my (Kutter’s)
own. What is more, nationwide demonstrations protesting police
brutality toward Black and Brown persons sparked a global reckoning
about racial injustices that has been centuries in the making. The
result of these overlapping catastrophes is a frayed and fraying
national psyche, the full implications of which will not soon be
known, much less understood. The only thing that we do know with
crystal clarity is that the suffering and loss are not evenly
distributed. Whether the active agent is a virus, an increase in global
temperatures, or the systemic and structural racism of Western
societies, the victims of all this trauma are overwhelmingly and
disproportionately members of marginalized groups.
As it concerns our work as psychologists, our response to the
various mental, emotional, and behavioral imbalances triggered by
these cascading crises could take a number of forms. One way to
respond would be to name their underlying “pathologies” in such a

-- 214 of 236 --

way that we have no other choice but to pluck them out at their
roots, removing them permanently from what we believe to be an
otherwise life-giving environment. Another approach would be to get
creative and respond humbly to that which we must acknowledge is
always already out of our control, recognizing that the imbalances
produced by contemporary life are invitations to form a deeper and
more intimate relationship with the land and one another.
Drawing on the insights of biodynamic farming, we might even say
that to participate as psychologists in the kingdom Jesus inaugurated
is to altogether cease from naming perceived threats as “weeds” in
need of uprooting and instead create spaces and cultivate soils that
will allow all plants to flourish and grow. Indeed, it may very well be
that, in the coming kingdom, there simply is no such thing as a
weed, not because life is easy or without thorns, but because every
living thing has a vital role to play. And if this is truly the case, then
it requires us to adopt not only a new way of seeing the world, but a
new set of eyes.
To see the world in this way—with kingdom-oriented eyes—is to
look at the beautiful complexity of our life in the natural order, which
can be harsh and unforgiving, and see that it is alive with infinite
possibility. It is to envision both the world and the complicated
human beings in it the same way John and Molly see the human and
nonhuman life on their land. As farmers, they look at the coyote and
see an ally against gophers instead of a killer of chickens; they look
at maggot-filled cow dung and see an excellent source of chicken
feed rather than a fly infestation; they look at a plot of land an hour
outside of LA and see the site of a regenerative farm instead of a dry
and barren wasteland. And as John says, “When I look at it like that,
it’s perfect.” What if we did the same? What if we saw those who
struggle with depression or schizophrenia or eating disorders not as
threats to themselves and others but as beloved children of God
who, enlivened by the Spirit, are not only integral members of the
community but also a sign and a symptom of a deeper imbalance in
the land—an imbalance to which we all contribute and are all
responsible for addressing?

-- 215 of 236 --

All this to say, the wisdom that emerges from regenerative farming
isn’t simply about farming. It’s about learning to see differently. It’s
about acknowledging that, no matter how large a particular plant
becomes, or how expansive its root system, unless we train our
senses in new ways, all we will ever be able to see are slightly
overgrown shrubs or, worse yet, weeds that need to be eliminated.
Just as we stated in the opening chapter on how to do theology, our
goal in writing this book was not to tell you everything there is to
know about theology or the historical development of doctrine but to
provide you with a set of theological lenses that might allow you to
develop insight into the world you inhabit. So instead of giving you
more information
about God, our goal was to invite you into a
different way of being in the world—to
know God more deeply.
And this is precisely the gift that constructive theology offers to
people of faith in general and students of psychology in particular: a
new way of seeing and thus understanding our relationship with the
soil beneath our feet, our fellow creatures (human and nonhuman)
who inhabit the land along with us, and the God who placed us all in
this garden in the first place. Of course, developing new eyes isn’t
something that happens overnight. It takes time, a great deal of
patience, and the relinquishing of our false sense of control. On a
more fundamental level, it also involves death. But just as it is with a
seed buried deep beneath the ground, dying to our own selves (Gal.
2:20) is the necessary precondition for transformation and growth.
Or, to use Paul’s words, “What you sow will not come to life unless it
dies” (1 Cor. 15:36).
Some may find the topic of death a somewhat depressing note to
end on, but it serves as a fitting conclusion to our discussion, for it
encapsulates our hopes and prayers for you. Our objective was
never to provide you or anyone else with theological cover so that
you could pursue business as usual. We hope to initiate the
(sometimes painful) process of tilling up the soil of your life so that it
might be capable of producing abundant life—for you and for those
entrusted to your care. Which raises a question: To what should we
compare the person of Christian faith who is studying psychology?
That person is like a regenerative farmer who plants a seed in a

-- 216 of 236 --

garden. It grows and becomes a tree, and the wild birds nest in its
branches.
May it be so for you.
Portions of this conclusion were adapted from Kutter Callaway, “The Biggest
Little Farm: A Parable of the Kingdom,” Fuller Studio,
https://fullerstudio.fuller.edu/the-biggest-little-farm-a-parable-of-the-kingdom.
Used with permission.

-- 217 of 236 --

Acknowledgments
We would both like to thank the students we have had the honor of
teaching, the colleagues with whom we are blessed to work, and the
mentors who have continued to teach us long after their official roles
ended. We would especially like to thank the diverse group of
students, mentors, and colleagues who have continually helped us
reckon with the kind of privilege we have both inherited as White
males. You have remained fiercely committed to dismantling the
various systems and structures that often keep us from seeing this
privilege. Thank you for your grace, your courage, and most of all
your friendship.
We are also grateful to our editor, Bob Hosack, and those at Baker
who were enthusiastic about this book from the beginning. We thank
them for their guidance and wonderful editorial work that has helped
bring this project to completion.
From Kutter. I would like to thank William for his thoughtfulness
and patience as a coauthor. Without knowing anything about my
writing process, William committed to collaborating with me on this
project, and I can only hope that, in retrospect, he is still glad that
he did! I could not have picked a better partner in crime. Our
interactions over the course of writing this book made me a better
theological and psychological thinker; on a much deeper level, they
made me a better human. Thanks for all the countless hours you put
into this project, even on top of all your other responsibilities and
commitments. I would also like to thank Tina Armstrong, who co-
teaches the touchstone class at Fuller Seminary with me for all
incoming psychology PhD students. Her enthusiasm for this project,
along with her willingness to let me make mistakes in the classroom
while teaching psychology students, have been critical in shaping my
understanding of the role of theology in clinical and research
psychology.

-- 218 of 236 --

Finally, I would like to thank my wife, Jessica, and my three
daughters, Callie Kay, Mattie Kate, and Maeve Virginia. It’s not easy
having a husband and father who writes books and thinks thoughts
for a living. I am blessed to have a family that chooses to love me
each day knowing full well that a great many of my numerous
activities are simply my way of distracting others from truly seeing
me.
From William. I would like to extend my deep gratitude to my
wife, Kimberly, for her loving support during this writing process.
During the process of completing the final chapters and reviewing
the drafts of the manuscript, our first child, Liam, was born. Kimi, I
continue to be amazed at your strength and resilience. You believed
in this book project and offered your encouragement along the way
—despite our many sleepless nights with a new baby and my being
a full-time student in a doctoral program. I’ve grown to love you
more over these past months as we’ve embarked on raising our son
together, and I’ve had more joy in this process than I could have
imagined. Thank you for grounding me in the things that are
important in life.
When Kutter contacted me about the possibility of coauthoring this
book, I had a rough outline of a proposal that I had started years
ago on a similar topic. But, as things go in the academic world, it
was placed on a backburner because of more pressing matters. On
comparing our notes, there was almost a complete symmetry
between our visions for the book you are now holding in your hands:
a constructive theological approach for students studying
psychology. I’m immensely grateful to have traveled with him on this
journey and thankful for his courage and vision that imagined us
collaborating as coauthors. I would not have been able to do it
without him, and this project is vastly better than what I could have
done on my own. Thank you for the nourishing collaboration and the
reminder that theologizing is best done in community.

-- 219 of 236 --

Index
American Psychological Association (APA) ethics, code of, 72–74
anger, 168–69
Anselm of Canterbury, 128–29
anthropology, 4, 33, 153–54
theological, 50, 107–8, 114–15, 117–21
Apricot Lane Farm, 195–96, 200
assumptions, 6, 41
operative, 4–5, 33, 76, 78–79
atheism, functional, 130, 132, 137–38
Atwood, George, 168
Augustine of Hippo, 35, 142, 143
Barth, Karl, 37–38, 77, 78, 79, 116
Beck, Richard, 89
behavior and thought patterns, 165–69
biases, content, 145–46
Bible (Scripture), 36
authority of, 37–38
on humans, 55–56
interpretation of, 37–39, 107–8, 110, 132
special revelation, 58–62
theological lenses, 37–39, 43, 107
Black theology, theologians, 107, 109–14
blindness, 10–11, 21–24, 43–44
Boyd, Robert, 40
Brandchaft, Bernard, 168
breath of God, 83–85
Brown, Brené, 151
Brown, Jeannine K., 5n2, 28n7, 74n5, 77n14
Brown, Warren, 36–37, 104, 166
Brueggemann, Walter, 87, 180
Brunner, Emil, 78
Buber, Martin, 8, 78
Buckley, Michael J., 132n10
Butman, Richard, 165

-- 220 of 236 --

Cahill, Lisa, 187
Calvin, John, 76n9, 158
Carr, Anne, 111
Catholic Christianity, 106, 109n18, 131–32
Worker Movement, 176–77
Chester, John and Molly, 195–96, 198, 200
Christ.
See Jesus Christ
Christianity, and the church, 106
Eastern Orthodox Church, 188
historic theological tradition, 35–35, 39, 43, 77–78, 144
mental illness, views of, 153–56, 170–72
See also Catholic Christianity; Protestant Christianity
Christians, 112–13
psychology, study of, 55–57, 60–62, 66–68, 114–15, 140
science and, 142–43
See also faith, Christian
clinical psychology, 162
education, training, 13–16
perspectives, 33, 44–45, 73–74
practice, 72–74, 77n14, 90–92
relationships, 156–58
Spirit of God and, 83, 85
theology of, 164–69
See also psychotherapy, psychotherapists
common grace, 51, 63–66, 79, 116–17, 165, 169, 187–88
Cone, James, 109
Connor, Alana, 40
conscience, 80–81
contextual theology, 178–80
creation, 52, 60–62, 103
domination of, 135–37
as framework, 51, 53, 57–62, 66–68
general revelation, 57–62, 66–68, 75–79, 80, 99–100, 125–28, 196–97
goodness of, 104–5, 125–27
Spirit of God and, 63, 66, 80
stewardship, 6, 51, 66–67, 136–37
theology of, 50–52, 58–59, 61–63, 98, 103, 127, 135
trinitarian understanding of, 43, 51–52, 53, 56–57, 66, 76, 169
Crisp, Oliver, 116
Croasmun, Matthew, 28n6
cultural context, 9–13, 26, 34–36, 37–38, 41–43

-- 221 of 236 --

cultural identities, 10–11, 40, 42
cultural lenses, 22–25, 107–8
culture, 11, 39–43, 65–66, 83, 100
definitions of, 10, 39–42
institutions, 41–42
phenomena, 42
Spirit and, 81–82
Damasio, Antonio, 40–41
Day, Dorothy, 176–79
decentering, 87–89
depravity, 115, 143–44
depression, 72, 96–97
development, human, 13–14, 42, 56, 81, 103–4, 117, 119–21
disease, pathology model, 50, 153–54
disruption, 86–87, 90, 91–92
dissonance, 36–37
Eastern Orthodox Church, 188
Ecclesiastes, book of, 84, 85n25, 140
emotions, 150–52, 154–56
anger, 168–69
Enlightenment, the, 136n14, 154–55
eschatology, age to come, 103, 113–14, 146, 185–86
kingdom of God, 10, 113–14, 165, 185–86, 200
evil, 63–64, 105, 138, 181
evolution
and psychology, 81, 139–40, 141, 144
and science, 40
experience, personal, 34, 39, 43
experimental psychology, 14–15, 33, 83, 127–28, 141–44
predictive research, 141–43, 184
statistical hypothesis testing, 129, 142–43
experimental theology, 144–47
faith, Christian, 13–14, 72, 74, 100
and contextual theology, 178–80
emotions and, 151–52
knowledge and, 128–29
and psychotherapy, 72–75
science and, 129–34

-- 222 of 236 --

farming, regenerative, 195–98, 200–201
feminist and womanist theology, theologians, 107, 108, 109, 111–12
Fergusson, David, 63
flourishing, 24, 43, 64, 100–103, 115, 119–20, 143–44, 146–47, 179
frameworks, 48–49, 131
creation as, 51, 53, 57–62, 66–68
religious, 154–55
trinitarian, 98–99, 154–55
Francis (pope), 109n18
Freud, Sigmund, 54
Fujimura, Makoto, 82
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 22–23, 145
Galileo, 58, 131
general revelation, 57–62, 66–68, 75–79, 80, 99–100, 125–28, 196–97
God, 9, 13
as Creator, 61, 63, 98–99, 105
emotions and, 151–52
grace of, 63–66, 80–81, 187–90
hesed, 183–84
imago Dei, 50, 79, 81, 98, 115–16, 118–21, 143–44, 177
interactions with humanity, 53, 55–56, 57, 74, 75–79, 81–82
knowledge of, 8, 10, 57–60, 76–78, 140
love of, 56, 98–99, 101–2, 105, 118, 156–57, 159, 178–80, 183–84
mission of, 49–50, 62, 103–4, 199
presence of, 3, 75–79, 80–81, 154–55, 161–64
providence of, 62–66
relationship with, 3, 8, 27, 116–17, 157, 188–89
as Trinity, 49–51, 98–99, 102, 105, 119, 188
See also kingdom of God
goodness, 63–64, 66
grace, 80–81, 187–89, 190
common, 51, 62–66, 79, 116–17, 165, 169, 187–88
prevenient, 64–65
Great Depression, 175–77
Green, Joel, 28–29
Gregory, Brad S., 130–31, 132–33
Guder, Darrell, 191
Gunton, Colin, 112, 171
Hampson, Peter, 55

-- 223 of 236 --

Hargrave, Terry, 168
Hart, Trevor, 129
Hartley, David, 141
hesed, 183–84
hevel, 84–85, 90–92
historic theological tradition, 35–35, 39, 43, 77–78, 144
Hoekema, Anthony, 158
hope, 141, 178, 184, 185–87
Hopkins, Gerald Manley, 126
hospitality, 64, 171–72, 179–80, 184–85, 190–93
houses of hospitality, 176–77, 178
risk, 192–93
human beings, 55–56
curiosity, 65–66, 77
development, 13–14, 42, 56, 81, 103–4, 117, 119–21
dignity, worth, 56–57, 108, 110, 165, 171–72, 177–79, 190–91
embodiment, 103–6, 118–19
flourishing, 24, 43, 64, 100–103, 115, 119–20, 143–44, 146–47, 179
God, interactions with, 53, 55–56, 57, 74, 75–79, 81–82
hevel, 84–85, 90–92
imago Dei, 50, 79, 81, 98, 115–16, 118–21, 143–44, 177
ontology, 114–17
restoration, 99–104, 105–8, 115–16, 159–62, 186
spirit, 84–85, 86–87, 89–92, 98–99
wholeness, 191–93, 198–99
identity, 40, 41, 72, 88–89, 119
cultural, 10–11, 40, 42
decentering, eccentric, 88–89
disconnection, 150–51
IKEA, 47–49, 61
imago Dei, 50, 79, 81, 98, 115–16, 118–21, 143–44, 177
imbalances, 198–201
incarnation, 97–98, 101–6, 111–12, 114–17, 160–62
individualism, 154, 157
integration, 5–6, 28, 30n9, 75n8, 115
Irenaeus, 98, 104
Israel, Israelites, 81–82, 87–88, 90, 161, 183, 190
Jeeves, Malcolm, 131
Jeremiah (prophet), 87

-- 224 of 236 --

Jesus Christ, 80, 89, 166
grace, 187–88
hospitality, 190, 192–93
incarnation, 97–98, 101–6, 111–12, 114–17, 160–62
parables, 196–98
poor, solidarity with, 109–12, 113, 163, 176–77, 178–81
redemption, 58, 59–60, 62, 65, 90–91
resurrection, death and, 60, 127, 185–86
salvation, work of, 160–61
special revelation, 99–100
Spirit and, 89–90
wisdom, 196–98
work of, 76, 100, 107, 117–21
Jewett, Robert, 81
Johnston, Robert K., 77n14, 79
Josiah (king), 87–89
justice, 108, 146, 164, 179–83
hope and, 186–87
love of God, 180–81
for marginalized, 180–83, 191
restoration and, 180–81
social, 108–9, 111–12
Kelsey, David, 107–8, 160
Kierkegaard, Søren, 78n17
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 113
kingdom of God, 68, 112, 163, 191–92, 197
already and not yet, 101, 198–99
eschatological, coming, 10, 113–14, 165, 185–86, 200
work of, 66, 103
knowledge, 22–23, 44, 127–32
behavioral patterns, 169–70
faith and, 128–29
of God, 8, 10, 57–60, 76–78, 140
practice and, 14–15
science and, 135–38
sources of, 36–37
Kuhn, Thomas, 32, 136
Kuyper, Abraham, 64–65, 66
Latin American, Latinx theologies, 108–9, 111

-- 225 of 236 --

Lewis, C. S., 79
liberation theology, 108–9, 111, 112
Lonergan, Bernard, 26
love, 106, 118, 192
of God, 56, 98–99, 101–2, 105, 118, 156–57, 159, 178–80, 183–84
hesed, 183–84
justice and, 180–81
for neighbors, 118, 158–59, 184
relational, 183–85
Ludwig, Thomas, 131
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 16, 38
marginalization, marginalized, 108–9, 111–12, 145, 163, 199
justice for, 180–83, 191
mental illness, 163–64, 170–72
Markus, Hazel Rose, 40
Maurin, Peter, 176
McGill, Arthur, 89
McGrath, Alister, 58–59
McGruder, Juli, 153, 172
McMinn, Mark, 62, 75n8, 85n25, 154, 167, 186, 189
Menninger, Karl, 155
mental illness, 72, 153–54, 155, 165
marginalization, 163–64, 170–72
mercy, 176–77
Migliore, Daniel, 107
Mill, J. S., 141
Moltmann, Jürgen, 83–84, 92, 101–2, 185–86
Moltmann-Wendell, Elisabeth, 101–2
morality, ethics, 54, 115, 181
APA code, 72–74
science and, 133, 135, 138
Murphy, Nancey, 136
naming, 3–4, 10, 139, 145, 170, 200
naturalism, 52, 53–55, 114, 132–33
psychology, 52, 53–55, 114, 133–35
natural theology, 75–76, 77
nature, domination of, 135–37
Neff, Megan Anna, 30n9, 62, 75n8, 85n25, 92n32, 189
Newman, Elizabeth, 190

-- 226 of 236 --

Nietzsche, Friedrich, 138
objectivity, 129–30, 132, 135–37, 145–46
Oliver, Mary, 172
Oliver, Simon, 59
ontology, 33, 54–55, 114–17
oppression, 108–10, 112–13, 130, 163–64, 180–83
optometry, 21–22, 25–26, 27
orthodoxy, 8–9
Palmer, Parker, 95–97, 101
parables, 196–98
paradigms, 32–33, 73, 131
Pargament, Kenneth, 73–74
pathology, disease model, 50, 153–54
Paul (apostle), 22–23, 80–81, 82, 116, 126–27, 140
perception, seeing, 21–25, 26–30, 37, 44–45
Pfitzer, Franz, 168
phoropter, 25–26, 27, 33–34, 43–44
Piaget, Jean, 66
Plantinga, Cornelius, 102
pneumatology, doctrine of, 75, 83–84, 91–92
positive psychology, 154–55, 156–57, 164–65, 186
predictive research, 141–43, 184
prereflective unconscious, 168–69
presence of God, 3, 75–79, 80–81, 154–55, 161–64
presence of Spirit, 75n7, 78–79, 81–82, 83–86, 98, 161–64
privilege, 108, 110–11, 136, 163, 182
prophets, 87, 180
propositional beliefs, 9
Protestant Christianity, 34, 37, 79, 106–7, 156, 188
sola Scriptura, 76, 132
See also Reformed tradition
Protestant Reformation, 131–32
providence, 51, 58, 62–66
psychologists, evolutionary, 81, 139–40, 141, 144
psychology, 100, 136n14, 170
assumptions, 4–5, 6, 33
atheism, functional, 130, 132, 137–38
Christian study of, 55–57, 60–62, 66–68, 114–15, 140
creation and, 60–62

-- 227 of 236 --

disease, pathology model, 50, 153–54
evidence, 139–41
experimental, 14–15, 33, 83, 127–28, 141–44
exploration, 66–68
naturalism, 52, 53–55, 114, 133–35
paradigms, 73–74, 83
physicalism, 53–54
positive, 154–55, 156–57, 164–65, 186
predictive research, 141–43, 184
scientific method, 30–33
statistical hypothesis testing, 129, 142–43
theology and, 3–6, 42–43, 52–53, 105–6, 114–17, 117–20
tradition, 14–16, 32–33
wisdom and, 16, 153–54, 157
See also clinical psychology
psychotherapy, therapists, 72–73, 106
as act of love, 160–61, 184–85
behavior coping styles, 167–69
Christian faith and, 150–52, 153–58, 166–69
work of Spirit through, 159–64, 166–67
racism, 108, 110–11, 113, 199
Rand, Kevin, 186
reality, 23–24, 102, 140, 185–86
understanding of, 36–37, 130, 135–36
redemption, 58, 104, 112, 188
behavior and thought patterns, 165–69
of Christ, 58, 59–60, 62, 65, 90–91
Reformed tradition, 5n2, 76
common grace, 64–65, 79
sin, 77–78
relationships, 106, 117–18, 160–62
in clinical psychology, 156–59
with God, 3, 8, 27, 116–17, 157, 188–89
healing, 166–67
patterns, 165–69
with self, 158–59, 165–66
resonance model, 36–37
restoration, 112, 186
of creation, 52, 103
of humanity, 99–104, 105–8, 115–16, 159–62, 186

-- 228 of 236 --

justice, 180–81
Revelation, book of, 113, 146
revelation, doctrine of, 50–52
general, 57–62, 66–68, 75–79, 80, 99–100, 125–28, 196–97
special, 58–62, 76–78, 79, 80–81
Ricoeur, Paul, 168
righteousness, 180–81
risk, 192–93
Rohr, Richard, 161–62
Roman Catholic Church.
See Catholic Christianity
Ross, Susan, 119
ruach.
See breath of God
Russell, Bertrand, 54
salvation, 58, 63–65, 90–91, 99, 106–9, 156, 157
Christ’s work of, 160–61
Sandage, Steven J., 5n2, 28n7, 74n5, 77n14
Scazzero, Peter, 152
Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 79
science, 51–52
application of, 132–33, 137–38
Christians and, 129–34, 142–43
content biases, 145–46
context, 145–46
faith and, 129–34
investigation, discovery, 50, 53, 59–62, 65–66, 127–28
knowledge and, 135–38
morality, ethics, 133, 135, 138
nature, domination of, 135–37
objectivity, epistemological, 129–30, 132, 135–37, 145–46
theology and, 28–29, 131–34
scientific method, 30–33, 54–55, 129
scientism, 53–54
Scripture.
See Bible (Scripture)
seeing, perception, 21–25, 26–30, 37, 44–45
self-awareness, 11–12, 38, 158–59, 168–69, 171, 183–83, 189
Seligman, Martin, 154
sexism, 108, 109, 111
shalom, 102–4, 160, 165, 179, 198–99
Simon, Caroline, 37
sin, 50, 64–65, 80–81, 112

-- 229 of 236 --

behavior patterns, 166–68
consequences of, 22–23, 77–78, 82, 102
depravity, 115, 143–44
Skinner, B. F., 141
slavery, 110–11
social justice, 108–9, 111–12.
See also justice
social media, 34–36
Sophocles, 14
special revelation, 58–62
spirit, human, 8, 84–85, 86–87, 89–92, 98–99
Spirit of God, 6, 39, 116, 144
co-laboring with, 78–79, 83, 85, 99, 179–80
creation and, 63, 66, 80
culture and, 81–82
decentering, 87–89
disruption, 86–87, 90, 91–92
guidance of, 105
healing, transformation, 156, 157, 161–64, 167
human spirit and, 84–85, 86–87, 89–92, 98–99
pneumatology, doctrine of, 75, 83–84, 91–92
presence of, 75n7, 78–79, 81–82, 83–86, 98, 161–64
psychotherapy and, 159–64, 166–67
ruach, 80, 83–84, 85–86, 90–92
transformation, 157, 158–59, 162–63
unifying work, 171–72
work of, 58, 65, 117–21
statistical hypothesis testing, 129, 142–43
Steere, David A., 74
stewardship of creation, 6, 51, 66–67, 136–37
Stewart, Danté, 110
Stolorow, Robert, 168–69
Strawn, Brad, 5n2, 104, 166
suffering, 96–97, 101–2, 104–5, 161, 186–87, 198–99
oppression, 108–10, 112–13, 130, 163–64, 180–83
slavery, 110–11
Swinton, John, 165, 170–71, 172
Taylor, Charles, 154
Taylor, John V., 86, 88
theologians, 1–2, 5, 7, 16–17
theological method, 26–33

-- 230 of 236 --

theology, 41
Black, 107, 109–14
clinical psychology, 164–69
constructive, 28–32, 33–39, 43–44, 134, 200–201
contextual, 176–80
of creation, 50–52, 58–59, 61–63, 98, 103, 127, 135
cultural context, 9–13, 26, 34–36, 37–38, 41–43
definition, 7–9, 128–29
experimental, 144–47
feminist and womanist, 107, 108, 109, 111–12
integration, 5–6, 28, 30n9
Latin American, Latinx, 108–9, 111
lenses, 34–38, 39–43, 200–201
liberation, 108–9, 111, 112
natural, 75–76, 77
orthodoxy, 8–9, 37
practicing, 13–15, 16–17, 28–30
psychology and, 3–6, 42–43, 52–53, 105–6, 114–17, 117–20
science and, 28–29, 131–34
and tradition, 16–17, 32–33, 36, 37–38
Western, 107, 130, 143
Thomas Aquinas, 35, 185–86
Thompson, Marianne Meye, 98n4
Tippett, Krista, 95–96
Torrance, T. F., 60
Touza, Kaitlin, 186
Toy Story, 1–2, 3–4
tradition
historic, 35–35, 39, 43, 77–78, 144
theological, 16–17, 32–33, 36, 37–38
transformation, 90–91, 163, 166–67, 172, 188–89, 192–93
Jesus Christ and, 105, 113, 115–16
Spirit and, 157, 158–59, 162–63
Trinity, 49–51, 98–99, 102, 105, 119, 188
Thurman, Howard, 110
truth, 36–37
vocation, 3–4, 15–16, 44, 62, 66, 83, 100, 112
Volf, Miroslav, 28n6
Watters, Ethan, 153–54

-- 231 of 236 --

weeds, 196–98, 200–201
Wesleyan tradition, 64–65
West, the, 83, 133, 143
psychology in, 16, 153–54, 157
societies, 130, 153–54
theology in, 107, 130, 143
Whites, 72, 110, 182
Christians, 11, 106, 107, 110–13
Willard, Dallas, 61, 115
wisdom, 7–8, 15, 143, 196–97, 200–201
Wolters, Al, 66
womanist theology, theologians, 107, 108, 109, 111–12
worshiping community, local, 34–35, 39
Yarhouse, Mark, 165
YouTube, 14–15

-- 232 of 236 --



-- 233 of 236 --



-- 234 of 236 --



-- 235 of 236 --



-- 236 of 236 --

